An Australian biotechnology firm has registered what it claims to be a unique vaccine against the world-wide problem of salmonella poisoning in chickens and hopes to register the vaccine for cattle as well.
The vaccine, registered with Australia's National Registration Authority for Agricultural and Vetinerary Chemicals, is the only salmonella vaccine able to be used on chicken eggs, Bioproperties Australia Pty Ltd said on Wednesday.  
"There's no vaccine in the world that can do that presently," said managing director David Tinworth, who estimated total annual sales of "tens of millions of dollars" if the vaccine was able to be sold internationally.
"We can actually inject this vaccine into the egg before it hatches because most of the salmonella spread into the poulty industry are in the hatcher," he told Reuters.
Bioproperties has successfully trialled the genetically manipulated vaccine in both chickens and cattle, the national government's Genetic Manipulation Advisory Committee, which oversaw the trials, confirmed to Reuters on Wednesday.  
The company has also applied to register the vaccine domestically for use in cattle, Tinworth told Reuters. "The registration is in process," he added.
Vaccine sales into the poultry industry will begin at the end of this year, and Bioproperties plans to begin sales into local dairy and cattle industries within 18 months, he said.
"We are seeking registration in the whole of Europe (through the European Community) and the U.S.," Tinworth said.
To develop the vaccine, Bioproperties secured a sub-licence on a patent registered in the United States for a technique known as gene depletion, he said.  
Bioproperties sub-contracted the vaccine research work to the Royal Melbourne Institute of Technology, which used the patented gene-depletion technique to develop a benign salmonella bacterium which stimulated the immune system.
Unlike existing salmonella vaccines, the gene-depleted vaccine carries no risk of inducing salmonella infection, Tinworth said. "This vaccine is totally safe in the sense that it cannot cause salmonelosis," he added.
Bioproperties will pay royalties on sales to both the U.S. patent-holder Praxis and the institute.  
It is now working with Wyeth Australia Ltd, a unit of U.S. pharmaceutical group American Home Products Corp, to register a salmonella vaccine for humans, Tinworth said.
Such a vaccine would be well suited for use on immuno-supressed people such as AIDS sufferers, he added.
However, the company's initial market will be the huge poultry market, which slaughters an estimated 22 billion broilers each year, Tinworth said, adding the vaccine would be priced below current poultry vaccines at one U.S. cent per dose.
-- Melbourne Bureau 613-286-1421
