Australia's Trust Bank said on Friday a locally listed insurer and two offshore institutions had expressed interest in buying a 49 percent stake in the bank.
Trust Bank managing director Paul Kemp declined to name the three groups but said such an early response to the bank's quest for a long-term strategic partner was a good sign.
"We have had three expressions that are potentially worth listening to," Kemp told Reuters.  
They were from a local insurer, an unlisted offshore insurer and another offshore financial instution, thought to be a bank, which approached the Trust Bank through an intermediary.
Tasmania-based Trust Bank announced in March that it was looking for a strategic partner to take a 49 percent stake, hopefully by early 1998.
The bank then plans to issue 41 percent of its equity to the public by the end of 1998 and embark on national expansion.
Trust Bank is effectively owned by a community trust and, like mutual societies, has no shareholders.  
It has net assets of A$143 million, implying a total value of A$257 million, based on the goodwill paid in the sale of another regional Australian bank, BankWest Ltd, in 1995.
One insurance analyst said the most likely local insurer to have expressed an interest in taking a stake in Trust Bank was Sydney-based GIO Australia Holdings Ltd.
National Mutual Holdings Ltd has ruled out any interest in acquiring a banking licence, saying it is no longer worth paying a premium due to convergence in the industry.
Colonial Ltd already owns a bank.  
The analyst said it was unlikely any of the other seven listed insurers would be interested.
"I imagine it's probably GIO, but it doesn't sound to me like it would be a big issue whether it got it or not," the Melbourne-based analyst told Reuters.
The value of a bank to an insurer would be the bank's distribution network, the analyst said.
But Trust Bank's branch network is confined mainly to Tasmania state, its home market.
It has just four branches outside Tasmania.  
Trust Bank's Kemp said the bank would soon choose a big global accountancy firm to help it identify a partner. It is also drafting an information memorandum for potential partners.
Kemp insisted a banking licence was still a valuable asset for non-bank institutions. "You are going to get an immediate foothold in the Australian market place," he said.
"You are going to acquire a franchise which has considerable value, you are going to get a distribution network. You are going to hire a level of expertise," he said.  
Trust Bank has ruled out any of the other local banks as a strategic partner, saying none of them would be interested in fulfilling Trust bank's broader ambitions.
-- Melbourne Bureau 613-9286-1421
