Shell Australia Ltd said it wants to integrate the huge North West Shelf and Gorgon gas projects off northwest Australia and that talks with its partners would soon enter a "constructive" phase.
Shell, a part owner in each project, dismissed as absurd the option of developing Gorgon as a stand-alone project with its own greenfield liquified natural gas (LNG) plant, and said it was working to jointly develop Gorgon and the North West Shelf.  
"It's been our contrivance for the last year to bring it (Gorgon) in," Shell Australia chief executive Roland Williams told Reuters in an interview late on Thursday night.
"I believe we can look for quite constructive discussions on this now." Williams did not give a timetable for a decision.
"Everybody wants to do the right thing. We have got to try and understand each other," he said.
Shell owns a sixth of the North West Shelf project, which has a total production capacity of 7.5 million tonnes per annum (MTPA) through its LNG plant on the Burrup Pensinsula.  
The other partners are The Broken Hill Pty Co Ltd, the MiMi consortium, Chevron Corp, British Petroleum Co and Woodside Petroleum.
Shell also owns two-sevenths of the nearby Gorgon gas field, which has the capacity to produce 6 MTPA but is still subject to feasibility studies. The other partners are Chevron, Texaco Inc and Mobil Corp unit Ampolex Ltd.
Shell and other main players in the two projects are under pressure from the Western Australia state government to decide soon on the future development of the state's LNG industry.  
"There's no question we must expand," Williams said, adding that he and the visiting chairman of the Royal Dutch/Shell Group's committee of managing directors, Cor Herkstroter, spoke to Western Australia premier Richard Court in Perth this week.
"The Japanese market want that capacity and we have a wonderful position there, so Shell is absolutely 110 percent behind the need to expand capacity in Western Australia," he said. But, Williams added, "It is frankly absurd in building another LNG plant on the north sea front of Western Australia."  
"Our attitude to Gorgon is very straight forward. For God's sake don't go and waste the money building another grass-roots plant in Western Australia. We've got one of the best in the world at the Burrup Pensinsula," he said.
"You can pipe all the gas in there."
Japanese gas and power utilities take the bulk of North West Shelf LNG and have agreed to buy an additional 6.8 MTPA from next decade, paving the way for a A$5 billion expansion of the North West Shelf project to double capacity at the Burrup plant.
The extra capacity would start to come on stream in 2003 and reach around 14.7 mtpa two years later, Williams said.  
The North West Shelf and Gorgon partners should optimise the resources, developing the lowest-cost reserves first, he said.
"On the Burrup Pensinsula we have world's nicest LNG plant and offshore we have wave after wave of gas. We can produce gas from there I think till the end of the next century.
"What you do is to optimise your up-front economics," Williams said. "You take obviously the cheapest gas to liquify earliest, because if you are going to put in A$5 billion into an investment, you are looking for the best cash flow in the first year of operation. Gorgon will go into there, and we are very happy to cooperate on that...."  
The MiMi partner in the North West Shelf project is a 50-50 joint venture between Mitsui &amp; Co Ltd and Mitsubishi Corp.
-- Melbourne Bureau 613-9286-1421
