A new diamond mine looks likely to go ahead in north Australia after one of its backers on Thursday described a final feasiblity study on the project as "encouraging".
Base metals miner Aberfoyle Ltd, which has a minority interest alongside diamond group Ashton Mining Ltd in the Merlin project in the Northern Territory, said the study was now virtually complete.
"I think both companies have previously said they expected this to be developed into a project, albeit not at a large scale initially," Aberfoyle managing director Mike Eager told Reuters.
"I think it's probably on track for that sort of conclusion," Eager said.
The feasibility study, prepared by engineering consultants Bateman-Kinhill, has been discussed by the two owners and could be decided upon as early as this month.
The report is due before Ashton's board on June 19.
Aberfoyle said both companies would make a final decision by the end of the September quarter.
Ashton owns 77.5 percent of Merlin. Aberfoyle has the rest.
The feasibility study assumes a modest start to mining, with stage one annual capacity of 500,000 tonnes of ore. Ashton has already said the first stage would cost about A$20 million (US$15.2 million).
The joint venture partners plan to develop some open pits before evaluating Merlin's underground mining resource and proceeding to a stage two expansion.
"We are still encouraged by what we have seen by the further work on site and the further (work on the) feasibility study and certainly there is no reason for discouragement," Eager said.
The Merlin prospect contains about 12 kimberlite pipes -- rock formations associated with diamonds -- and only three of them have been bulk sampled for diamonds so far, he said.
The sampling results suggest further upside to the project, Eager added.
"There's evidence in at least some of the pipes that there's an improvement in stone quality and perhaps in grade ... at the perimeters of the pipes," he said.
Ashton reported late last year that diamonds recovered from Merlin were described as being 35 percent gem quality, with the remainder near gem quality.
In its March quarter production report, Ashton said the results of recent cutting and polishing tests on 25 Merlin diamonds had been "very encouraging".
Ashton, which is owned 46.95 percent by Malaysia Mining Corp Bhd, owns 40.1 percent of the world's biggest diamond mine, the Argyle mine in northwest Australia.
(A$1 = US$0.76)
