British Governor Chris Patten challenged business on Thursday to defend the rule of law that had made Hong Kong a success, and to destroy fallacies that may harm the territory in the run-up to China's mid-1997 takeover.
"The rule of law is not an optional extra. It is what makes Hong Kong different, it is what makes Hong Kong successful," Patten told the Hong Kong General Chamber of Commerce in a speech.
"Without it, a lot of you would not be here," he said.
Britain hands back Hong Kong to China in 264 days from now, ending a century and a half of colonial rule over an outpost that has become one of Asia's economic pearls.
China has promised Hong Kong substantial autonomy and the preservation of its capitalist system under a "one country, two systems" formula.
Patten and chamber chairman James Tien glossed over an image projected in local newspapers lately that the governor and the business community were at loggerheads over 1997-related issues.
Several times this year Patten chastised businessmen who pandered to Beijing's communist rulers to beg favours and thus invited China to encroach upon Hong Kong's autonomy.
Tien stressed at Thursday's gathering that the key business body backed the government on key policies. Patten thanked them, drawing applause, and said his critics were in a minority.
Tien said the chamber supported the pegging of Hong Kong's currency to the U.S. dollar, the rule of law, the independence of judges and the civil service, and the commitment to good government.
But he did not mention Britain's demand for Hong Kong's fully elected legislature to continue after the 1997 handover, a major plank of Patten's policy, or China's plans to scrap this legislature and replace it with an appointed "provisional" body.
Asked by one businessman if there were any conditions under which Patten would cooperate with the "provisional legislature", the governor flatly replied "No".
Patten stressed the value of a political opposition. He cited a poll in which three-quarters of executives questioned said opposition to government posed no threat to a territory's prospects and that Hong Kong's opposition was in fact too weak.
"I'm very grateful to the chamber for everything they've been doing to redress the balance," he said, drawing guffaws of laughter for his ironic reference to barbs that he has received from some local business leaders in recent months.
Patten exhorted business to speak out for Hong Kong's autonomy, opposition to corruption, and for basic freedoms. He also asked it to help destroy four big fallacies that he said harmed Hong Kong's prospects and image.
These were the notions that Hong Kong's economy needed stimulative intervention, that it was over-regulated and was losing its competitive edge, that welfare spending was too high, and that the rule of law was irrelevant to economic success.
"You can give Hong Kong a lead in defending the rule of law, open and accountable government... by helping to nail the fallacies I have described. When you speak up for Hong Kong, it makes a difference," Patten said.
The fact that over half the companies listed on the Hong Kong bourse had domiciles in places such as Bermuda or the Cayman Islands, he said, showed the value the business community attached to the rule of law.
In recent years many firms have hedged their 1997 risks by shifting their legal domiciles to overseas jurisdictions.
