Hong Kong, wary about upsetting its future Beijing masters when dissenters use it as an escape route, kept silent on Monday about Chinese dissident Wang Xizhe following reports he had fled to the British colony.
Human rights activists in Hong Kong said Wang, 46, fled here from his home in China's neighbouring Guangdong province over the weekend, just days after the communist authorities in Beijing bundled a colleague into a labour camp.
He was expected to leave Hong Kong soon, they said, possibly by Monday night, and probably for the United States.
The U.S. Consulate declined to confirm or deny that Wang had asked for asylum. "We don't comment on asylum cases," consulate spokesman Patrick Corcoran said.
Wang would be the second Chinese dissident known to have fled to the United States via Hong Kong this year. Liu Gang fled last May after months of police harassment following a six-year prison stint for helping to lead the 1989 student protest movement.
"According to our information Wang is safe at the moment," Robin Munro, Director of Human Rights Watch Asia, told Reuters.
"I think it's likely he'll probably be going on somewhere else fairly soon," Munro said.
Munro said he was unable to say where Wang was heading, but other human rights sources in Hong Kong said he was seeking refuge in the United States.
Washington has been generous in granting asylum to Beijing's political critics since a military crackdown against the student-led democracy movement in Tiananmen Square in June 1989.
Scores, perhaps hundreds, of Chinese dissenters have fled to the West since then through Hong Kong, local activists say.
"I assume he was about to be arrested by the Chinese authorities. I can't think what else would have prompted such a rapid departure," Munro said, attributing Wang's move to the three-year sentence passed on dissident Liu Xiaobo last week.
Wang and Liu sparked reprisals against remaining dissidents last month when they wrote a letter demanding the impeachment of President Jiang Zemin for violating the constitution by placing the army under Communist Party, rather than state, control.
Human rights sources said it was unlikely Wang would speak publicly in Hong Kong but that he would explain himself when he reached his destination.
As Hong Kong prepares to revert to Chinese sovereignty next July 1, issues of human rights, and especially help for mainland dissidents, have become acutely sensitive.
"The Hong Kong government asks such people to keep quiet while they are here as the price for facilitating their smooth exit from the territory," one human rights source said. "And the Americans go along with that quiet, too," he said.
Munro saw the latest developments in China as a blow.
"It's extremely discouraging and quite deplorable the way the (Chinese) government has intensified its crackdown on the few remaining dissidents in China in recent weeks," said Munro.
He said the dissident movement in China had effectively been crushed, with all prominent dissidents either in jail or forced into exile.
"The saddest thing about it is that Wang appears to have concluded there's no way he could continue to struggle for change from within the country," Munro said.
Wang's activism dates from 1974 when he co-authored an attack in Guangdong on the radical 1966-76 Cultural Revolution.
He took part in the 1979 Democracy Wall movement in Beijing and produced his own dissident newsletters. He was twice imprisoned and spent some 17 years in jail and labour camps.
He was released on parole in 1993, and before he fled he had been under constant police surveillance.
