Chinese dissident Wang Xizhe's flight to the United States via Hong Kong may be the last great escape of its kind, as China is sure to try to shut down the route next year, activists and analysts said on Wednesday.
Since Beijing sent tanks into Tiananmen Square in 1989 to put down a student-led protest movement, hundreds of Chinese dissidents have fled through Hong Kong in a secretive operation codenamed Yellowbird, activists said.
Wang, now in the United States, has not appeared in public yet, and it has not been confirmed that it was Yellowbird that helped him flee from the south China province of Guangdong last Friday.
But the underground escape route is bound to be sealed off when Hong Kong becomes a part of China next July 1, ending a century and a half of British colonial rule.
"China will have sovereignty here and technically it could prevent even a dissident who was given asylum by a foreign consulate here from actually leaving the territory," Robin Munro, director of Human Rights Watch Asia, told Reuters.
"So I expect that it's virtually going to come to an end as of July next year."
China on Tuesday loudly signalled its stance on future dissident tangles with Hong Kong. It branded Wang's escape an illegal frontier crossing and demanded that he and his abettors be punished for breaking the law.
"The judicial authorities are currently pursuing the legal responsibilities of Wang Xizhe and the plotters," foreign ministry spokesman Shen Guofang said in Beijing.
Very few in Hong Kong have any illusions that the territory will continue to be a conduit for dissidents to get out, or as a centre of pro-democracy anti-communist activism after 1997.
"Hong Kong will be subject to more pressure from the central government. Therefore it will be more difficult for dissidents to use Hong Kong as an escape route," said Peter Lee, a professor at the Chinese University of Hong Kong.
And those who help Chinese dissidents may have a tough time. "I think they will be liable to some kind of harassment and otherwise legal punishment," Lee said.
Lee Wing-tat, a legislator and key figure in the Hong Kong Alliance in Support of Patriotic Democratic Movements in China, an organisation that supports fleeing dissidents, said his group was likely to face trouble from China next year.
"A Chinese official made a statement a few months ago. He said if people participated in helping political dissidents escape from China, China will do something... My guess is some kind of punishment," Lee Wing-tat said.
But his group was pressing on with help for dissidents who are now exiled in Hong Kong and seeking asylum in the West.
"We will give them assistance, for example we will arrange some places for them to live, contact the Hong Kong government and foreign consulates, and arrange money for their family."
China's communist rulers have made clear they will not allow Hong Kong to become a centre of subversion.
China's Hong Kong policy boss Lu Ping said this year Beijing would not tolerate anti-constitutional preaching in Hong Kong.
Munro sees a bleak future for the Chinese dissidents in exile here after the handover and says they should all get out.
The three foremost candidates for Hong Kong's post-colonial leadership, who are now campaigning for support, made clear on Tuesday they would not upset Beijing by defending dissidents.
"There will be laws in Hong Kong and it is up to the chief executive to implement and obey the law... Whatever one does, it must be in the interests of of Hong Kong people," said shipping tycoon Tung Chee-hwa, considered China's favourite candidate.
