Chinese communities across the globe will soon have their very own high-society magazine, rivalling the standards of glamour publications such as Cosmopolitan and Vanity Fair.
Imagine a world-class magazine which combines the flair and colour visuals of the U.S. Architectural Digest and the  New York Times magazine. None of it is in English but in Chinese. "The Chinese" will hit the newsstands on November 1.
With editorial operations based in Hong Kong, the magazine is owned by Thailand-based M. China International and Manager Media Group, which publish Asia Inc. monthly and the daily Asia Times in English.
The group's chairman, Sondhi Limthongul, a Thai with third generation Chinese ancestry, is extending his reach to rich ethnic Chinese readers and to the regional magazine sector.
The publication, with a launch circulation target of 56,000 copies, comes at a time of ballooning interest, fuelled by the sudden growth of China itself, in the diaspora of overseas Chinese communities, from Southeast Asia to New York and Los Angeles, to London, Paris and Amsterdam.
A rash of books has been published lately on this powerful diaspora of Chinese, many of whom descend from merchants who migrated from China centuries ago and who, together with more recent migrants, form a "bamboo network" of almost 60 million people.
"A lot of Chinese today are at the cutting edge of many industries and want a magazine to rediscover ourselves, to tell our own story in our own words, in our own pictures," editorial director Liu Heung Shing said.
Hong Kong-born Liu, a Pulitzer prize-winning former wire service photographer acclaimed for his photo coverage of China, Russia, India, is the magazine's driving force.
"I think many people like me feel ashamed when they pick up a Chinese magazine, because it's never quite there," said Liu.
"There's nothing really to buy. Just political magazines for dissidents. When you read them it's frustrating. The news is always sandwiched in between lots of half-truths," he said.
The publication targets a niche of well-heeled Chinese professionals or company owners, aged 28 to 50, mainly overseas educated, with an annual personal income of at least US$120,000 or a household income of at least $150,000.
"Ethnic Chinese will form the most powerful network of entrepreneurs in the world in the next decade. Fifty-four million ethnic Chinese worldwide, with assets of more than one trillion (dollars) are the most successful entrepreneurs in the world," writes John Naisbitt, author of a recent book, Megatrends Asia.
Features on the rich and famous personalities such as high-flying socialite David Tang, actress Gong Li, publisher and entrepreneur Jimmy Lai, as well as up-and-coming Chinese like Shanghai catwalk model Yao Shuyi, will be the magazine's staple diet.
It will be illustrated by bold colour visuals and advertisements for the flashy, expensive brand names for which Chinese around the world have a passion.
The Chinese diaspora forms powerful business networks, bonded by a unique sense of being Chinese even if not citizens of a Chinese state.
Hundreds of of thousands of ethnic Chinese have returned to East Asia from other parts of the world in recent years to take advantage of the unique economic boom powering the region.
The magazine intends to be apolitical. "The aim is to rediscover ourselves, without any political context," said Liu.
But it will spotlight and probe Chinese personalities in politics, be they in China, Taiwan, Hong Kong or in the diaspora overseas. "There is a Chinese sense and sensibility which has nothing to do with politics -- how they view the notion of the people called 'the Chinese'," said Liu.
"We want personalities rather than polemics. Be it Singapore's leader Lee Kuan Yew or an American Chinese running for governor in a U.S. state."
The English title is The Chinese. The Chinese title is the character "Zhong" which means "centre", the first character of "Zhong Guo" or "Middle Kingdom", one of China's names. The word derives from an ancient pictogram of an arrow piercing a target.
By using the simple word "zhong" for Chinese, the publishers avoid political connotations that would associate Chinese people with a specific territory.
Can the idea make money? Is there really a niche for such a publication in the cut-throat international magazines market?
"It's a competitive environment, but advertisers have now come to the idea that there is this group of people who are high income earners, clearly part of this fast-emerging economic community in Taiwan, Singapore, Malaysia and elsewhere.
"If you look at Vogue, Esquire or others, these are giants with a strong appeal to advertisers. But Chinese language publishing is still a virgin market," Liu said.
