Hong Kong's post-1997 leadership campaign has begun in earnest with all the top candidates for the job as the territory's chief executive stating their positions on key issues in recent days.
The latest was Sir Ti Liang Yang, who on Monday made several policy statements including support for China's controversial plan to scrap the British colony's elected legislature.
With Britain's withdrawal and Hong Kong's reversion to Chinese rule 245 days away, would-be contenders to succeed Governor Chris Patten as the territory's top executive have sharpened their policy positions and revved up their campaigns.
"I think we have a real race in the sense that there is no chosen candidate in this contest," political expert Michael DeGolyer said on Tuesday.
DeGolyer, who heads a study on transition issues at a Hong Kong university, dismissed speculation that China had decided the outcome in advance and said rival Beijing factions were backing different Hong Kong personalities in the race.
"It's pretty clear they are backing different candidates in this contest," DeGolyer told a Hong Kong radio talk show.
The four main contenders among 31 nominees are Yang, shipping magnate Tung Chee-hwa, businessman Peter Woo and ex-appeals court judge Simon Li.
Yang, who resigned as the territory's chief justice last month to vie for the chief executive slot, broke with government policy when he ended his silence on China's plans for the legislature, describing them as legal and necessary.
China plans to dissolve Hong Kong's elected Legislative Council (Legco) -- reversing Patten's democratic reforms -- and install an appointed "provisional legislature". Britain and Hong Kong's democratic camp hotly oppose the plan.
"In my view the provisional legislature has a legal basis and there is a necessity to establish it," Yang told reporters.
He said without it, there was a risk of a legal vacuum arising during the transition to Chinese rule.
But Yang rejected the idea of the new assembly operating in tandem with Legco in the run-up to the handover.
He also said the enactment of new laws on subversion and treason, to reflect the change of sovereignty, should be left to a future permanent legislature to handle.
Despite the campaign atmosphere, the territory's new leader will not be democratically elected but chosen by the secretive, Beijing-appointed Selection Committee, a panel of 400 people from Hong Kong that will make the choice next month.
The Beijing-controlled Hong Kong daily Ta Kung Pao on Tuesday called the process "a democratic election with Hong Kong characteristics", a play on China's label for its own political system, "socialism with Chinese characteristics".
Yang also said he was shedding his British knighthood and the corresponding title "Sir".
Over the past week all four front-runners have made clear they would not challenge China's tough line on key political issues such as the legislature, democracy, human rights and freedom of expression in Hong Kong.
