The 11-year sentence handed down on Wednesday to Chinese dissident Wang Dan has awakened fears that critics of the Chinese administration in Hong Kong after the 1997 handover could face a similar fate.
Britain hands Hong Kong back to China in 243 days' time after more than 150 years of colonial rule.
The sentence imposed on Wang sparked a flurry of debate in Hong Kong on Thursday over the shape of future laws on subversion in the territory.
Hong Kong has for more than a century been a sanctuary for Chinese dissenters. Some 80 mainland dissidents who fled the communist mainland live in exile in the colony.
The territory also has a large home-grown anti-communist democracy movement, which Beijing officials have often branded as subversive because its adherents backed the 1989 student-led pro-democracy protests in Beijing's Tiananmen Square.
Hong Kong's future constitution, the Basic Law promulgated by China, requires laws to be passed after the handover to ban anti-constitutional activities, including subversion.
There has been intense speculation in Hong Kong over what actions the law will ban and whether or not it should be legislated by a provisional body that China plans to appoint upon the handover, or a new legislature expected to be elected in 1998.
So will Hong Kong "dissidents" face the same fate as Wang?
Members of the pro-Beijing political camp said no. "I would certainly dispute any suggestion that could be the case," Eric Li, a legislator and a member of the China-picked Preparatory Committee working out transitional arrangements, told reporters.
"We have our own judicial system and courts, and it will be up to the Hong Kong people to decide what that law is going to be like in the future," Li said.
But Martin Lee, head of Hong Kong's Democratic Party, said he believed Hong Kong dissidents would go to jail.
"If we have a similar law in Hong Kong passed under article 23 of the Basic Law, then the Hong Kong people's freedoms will likewise be curtailed," Lee said. "If we then do something which we do today lawfully, then we are liable to be put into prison, no matter how fair the judge is."
The four leading candidates jockeying to run Hong Kong after 1997 have all refrained from commenting on Wang's sentence.
But one, former chief judge Ti Liang Yang, said he hoped it would be the post-1997 elected legislature which tackles the subversion law and not the provisional body that China plans to install after scrapping the current elected legislature.
"When the time comes for the legislature to legislate under article 23 of the Basic Law they will take into consideration the conditions of Hong Kong, the laws of Hong Kong," Yang said.
