After a week of nervousness over its future freedoms, Hong Kong watched on Friday for the outcome of a Beijing gathering that will set the tone for the post-colonial government that takes over in 1997.
The Preparatory Committee of pro-China figures from Hong Kong and mainland Chinese officials was meeting in Beijing for two days to elect a 400-member caucus that will pick Hong Kong's first post-colonial leader and parliament.
The exercise will quicken the pace of the British colony's transition to Chinese rule in 242 days' time.
In the latest step in Britain's pull-out, Gurkha soldiers who were the backbone of the colonial garrison were set to bid a ceremonial farewell to one of their Hong Kong bases on Friday night.
Hong Kong was jarred this week by fears of a crackdown by China after the handover in view of the jailing in Beijing of prominent dissident Wang Dan.
The colony was also unnerved by remarks this month by Chinese Foreign Minister Qian Qichen, chairman of the Beijing meeting, that freedom of expression in Hong Kong would be limited after the sovereignty transfer at midnight next June 30.
On Thursday, a further jolt came when China barred entry to two Hong Kong politicians who wanted to petition the Beijing meeting against some of China's Hong Kong policies.
On Friday two more Hong Kong activists were expelled from Beijing.
On the eve of the Beijing meeting, a pro-China lobby group published a survey showing that most Hong Kong businessmen expected press freedom, the political system and human rights to deteriorate after the handover.
Some 72 percent expected less press freedom, 64 percent expected the political system to suffer, and 63 percent saw a deterioration in human rights, the survey by the Better Hong Kong Foundation showed.
A leading candidate to become the future leader of Hong Kong, former Chief Justice Ti Liang Yang, sought to allay fears this week that the territory would be forced to accept tough, Chinese-style laws on sedition after 1997.
"If you simply chant a few lines which do not incite any illegal acts, or which you don't expect to cause others to act radically, it should not be a problem," Yang said on Thursday.
But Yang and three other leading contenders for the top job were attacked by Hong Kong's leading democracy group for failing to condemn Wang Dan's 11-year jail sentence, saying they were ignoring local people's anger.
"They are not just angry about the fate of Wang Dan, what they are most worried about is whether Article 23 of the Basic Law will become a tool to curb their freedom of speech after the handover," said Szeto Wah, deputy head of the Democratic Party.
The Selection Committee make-up is expected to be announced on Saturday. The body will meet in Hong Kong next month to select the Chief Executive who will succeed colonial Governor Chris Patten next July.
