Hong Kong legislators plan court action and a lobbying mission to Britain in a "last-ditch battle" to save the territory's elected legislature from China's axe, pro-democracy leader Martin Lee said on Tuesday.
Britain hands the century-and-a-half-old colony back to China in 238 days, and Beijing is moving full steam ahead with a plan to appoint a new provisional legislature to replace the Legislative Council (Legco) that was fully elected in 1995.
A Chinese-controlled Selection Committee is to name the 60 members of the body at a meeting in Hong Kong next month.
The committee, formed in Beijing last weekend, is opposite to last year's election results in Hong Kong. It gives all the clout to pro-China factions and sidelines democracy groups who won a landslide 70 percent of last year's poll.
Lee, a lawyer and leader of the colony's largest political party, the Democratic Party, told Reuters the government had a duty to stop Beijing's provisional legislature from happening.
"Primarily it should be the responsibility of our attorney general to take them to the courts. But if the government will not act, then I'll certainly take them to the courts," he said.
"It's the last-ditch battle for Hong Kong," Lee said. "We should not look at it as a fait accompli. We should fight against it with all our might."
Britain has condemned China's plan and challenged Beijing to prove its legality under the Joint Declaration and Basic Law -- the documents which cover Hong Kong's sovereignty transfer.
Lee is flying to London on Friday to lobby Prime Minister John Major, opposition Labour Party leader Tony Blair and other British officials and members of parliament ahead of a November 14 House of Commons debate on Hong Kong's future.
"I want them to say the setting up of this legislature will amount to a most blatant breach of the Joint Declaration. So far the British government has refused to say that," Lee said.
He plans a similar mission to Australia and New Zealand later this month.
Another group of Hong Kong legislators led by independent Emily Lau is also flying to London to lobby. Colonial Governor Chris Patten, the ruling Conservatives' ex-chairman, also plans to be in London to press Hong Kong's case before the debate.
Reliable sources said Lee has already drawn up a raft of lawsuits to sue members of the provisional body and institutions if the new assembly is set up in breach of laws and treaties.
But Lee declined to reveal details. "I don't think I should reveal my hand. A lot will depend on what they do," he said.
Opponents of the Chinese plan point to findings by Legco's legal adviser, Jonathan Daw, who counselled in July that the provisional body would be illegal on several counts. Hong Kong's Bar Association has also highlighted illegalities.
Only one legislature is allowed to operate in Hong Kong, and no other body is allowed to pass bills under Hong Kong's constitutional set-up, Daw noted in written counsel. Any enactment of laws by a parallel body before the handover would amount to "usurpation" and would be unlawful, he said.
Lee said China's crackdown on dissidents, including the recent 11-year jailing of student leader Wang Dan for subversion, was another reason for Hong Kong's 6.3 million people to worry.
"It augurs very badly because what has happened to Wang Dan today can well happen to us tomorrow," Lee said.
"Unfortunately, Hong Kong will also have laws against subversion after 1997, because the Basic Law says so," he said.
"The provisional legislature, which is going to be a rubber stamp for Beijing appointed by Beijing, will certainly pass a law something like the law under which Wang Dan was convicted."
