The leader of Hong Kong's biggest pro-Beijing party said on Thursday the China-appointed interim legislature Beijing plans to set up next month would not clash with existing institutions before the handover.
Tsang Yok-sing, leader of the Democratic Alliance for the Betterment of Hong Kong (DAB), said the possibility that the provisional legislature would meet on the communist-ruled mainland rather than in Hong Kong has not been ruled out.
Britain is handing Hong Kong, its last major colony, back to China as an autonomous Special Administrative Region in 236 days' time, ending a century and a half of colonial rule.
Hong Kong's political establishment, and the governments of Britain and China, are polarised over China's plan to dissolve the elected Legislative Council (Legco) on July 1 and replace it with a provisional body until elections in 1998.
The plan is China's response to an enlargement of the democratic franchise by Governor Chris Patten, which Beijing has said violated the handover agreements.
In an interview with Reuters, Tsang said Hong Kong's constitutional arrangements did not prevent the provisional legislature from becoming Hong Kong's legislative body on July 1, after the sovereignty transfer.
"That is the date from which onwards, the provisional body is supposed to be involved in legislative work," Tsang said.
"Before that date, although the body is there, the Preparatory Committee and also some Chinese officials in charge of Hong Kong affairs have made it very clear that this provisional body will not be a legislature of Hong Kong."
The China-controlled Preparatory Committee has elected a 400-member body that will select both the territory's first post-colonial leader, the chief executive, and the provisional legislature. Both selections will be announced next month.
Critics portray the provisional legislature as a rubber-stamp body appointed by China that will enact repressive laws and eliminate many basic freedoms.
But Tsang told Reuters the committee process to establish the provisional body was just as much an election as the electoral arrangements for Legco, some of whose members are only indirectly elected.
Tsang, whose DAB fared badly against the popular Democratic Party in the September 1995 Legco elections, insisted that China had not breached the 1984 Sino-British treaty on the handover.
"China is abiding by the Joint Declaration. China is not going to set up a parallel legislature in Hong Kong before the actual handover," Tsang said.
"The place where the provisional body will work before July 1 next year has not been thoroughly discussed," he said.
"If people believe it would be inappropriate for the provisional body to meet in Hong Kong before July 1, 1997, then it can meet somewhere outside the territory," he said.
The leader of the Democratic Party, Martin Lee, said the provisional body would be illegal and that if the government did not take it to court, then he would do it himself.
"It's the last ditch battle for Hong Kong," Lee said. "We should fight against it with all our might."
Lee, who plans to lobby Britain next week to take firmer action, said the provisional legislature would roll back civil liberties and have dissidents jailed as they are in China.
China's crackdown, highlighted by the 11-year jail sentence handed to student leader Wang Dan last week, was a sign of what Hong Kong would be like after 1997, Lee said.
"Today Wang Dan, tomorrow you and me," he said.
