Shipping magnate Tung Chee-hwa saw his fortunes almost dashed on the rocks in the 1980s when the family company met ill winds, but his luck rebounded and now he could be Hong Kong's next leader.
Next month China's carefully screened Selection Committee will choose a chief executive to run Hong Kong after Britain hands the colony back in mid-1997.
Tung topped a recent popularity poll with 30.2 percent. His nearest rivals were former Chief Justice Ti Liang Yang with 27.5 percent, businessman Peter Woo with 8.7 percent and former High Court judge Simon Li with 3.3 percent.
Tung has been a senior member of a preparatory committee of pro-Beijing Hong Kong notables and mainland China officials crafting the power structures to replace British colonial rule.
He was lauded as an impartial and honest counsellor by Governor Chris Patten when Tung stepped down in June this year from Patten's advisory cabinet, the Executive Council.
He resigned in October as head of his family firm, Orient Overseas (International) Ltd, to make his leadership bid.
Tung's early campaigning consisted of clearing the decks of speculation that might lead to challenges on his integrity, such as how China had once saved his family from bankruptcy.
Tung took the helm of the business after his father died in 1979. He recently revealed China had helped bail out the firm 11 years ago by backing a US$120 million fund led by tycoon Henry Fok, a kingmaker in today's leadership contest. The family later bought back most of the shares and restored their majority.
"In 1985 and '86 we went through a very difficult time when the shipping business was in serious recession. Henry Fok led a syndicate of investment in our company," Tung said.
"I know there were mainland funds in it. I'm sure. To Mr Fok and those who have helped me...I am very grateful."
Tung was spotted as a possible favourite of China when President Jiang Zemin singled him out for a personal handshake at a meeting in Beijing this year.
Tung is believed to be acceptable also to Britain and to expatriate business leaders who hope he will form a "dream team" with incumbent Chief Secretary Anson Chan -- Hong Kong's top civil servant -- if China allows her to stay on after the flag change on July 1 next year.
Tung has links with the powerful in key capitals -- Beijing, Taipei, London and Washington -- whose influence will be important for Hong Kong's evolution after 1997.
Born in Shanghai in 1937, Tung was educated at Liverpool University in Britain.
The 59-year-old magnate has a patriarchal look, with grey bristly hair, bright eyes and hand-on-heart gestures.
The tycoon, who previously dodged the limelight, is said to lead a disciplined life, arriving at his office at dawn to perform t'ai chi exercises on the roof before starting work.
Despite a reputation for modesty, wisdom and caution, and his strong ties to China, Tung's local power base may ultimately stir some unease in Beijing.
"It is hard to see Beijing favouring someone with a local power base, who really means to run the show," said legislator and lawyer Margaret Ng.
Tung has made a point of tapping various views, including those of pro-democracy parties and trade unions.
"I have met with people of different social classes, organisations and political views. I have gained a deeper understanding of Hong Kong's future challenges," Tung said.
But he has also made increasingly strident pro-China policy utterances. He accused Patten of splitting Hong Kong's 6.3 million people through a speech that assailed China's plan to replace the elected legislature with an appointed assembly.
He has urged people to forget China's bloody army crackdown on the 1989 democracy movement in Beijing and to leave it to historians to judge the event.
