In an exercise dubbed by China as a "democratic election with Hong Kong characteristics", this bustling territory goes to the polls on Friday. But only 400 citizens out of 6.3 million people in the colony will be voting.
A 400-member Selection Committee formed under Beijing's tight rein will be inaugurated in Hong Kong with a month-long mission to elect the first post-colonial leader and the 60 members of a replacement legislature.
The committee, to be anointed by Chinese Foreign Minister Qian Qichen on his first official trip to the colony, will set the tone of the government to rule Hong Kong after Britain hands its Asian pearl back to China at midnight next June 30.
Hong Kong, one of Asia's economic wonders, is to become a Special Administrative Region of communist-ruled China. Beijing has pledged to maintain the territory's thriving capitalist system intact for 50 more years under the terms of China's "one country two systems" reunification policy.
Pro-democracy legislators attacked the leadership candidates in a debate on Wednesday for failing to address issues of human rights and democracy and called for a real general election.
Trade unionist Lee Cheuk-yan told Hong Kong's existing legislature that a leading contender, shipping tycoon Tung Chee-hwa, was dangerous.
"Mr Tung is the most conservative among them, and he is the most dangerous as he calls on Hong Kong people to be willing to be obedient citizens," Lee said.
But a motion critical of the leadership selection was defeated by the pro-Beijing camp. Several democrats were absent on a lobbying mission to London.
"Democratisation is not like instant noodles... It took hundreds of years for Western countries to develop their present democratic systems," pro-Beijing legislator Ip Kwok-him said.
The sovereignty transition has been frought with disputes between China and Britain, between colonial governor Chris Patten and Chinese envoys, and between Hong Kong's burgeoning democracy movement and a pro-Beijing political camp.
They have sparred over the future of Hong Kong's human rights, democracy and basic freedoms, over whether or not the commercial "level playing field" will continue, and over the survival of Hong Kong's autonomy and the rule of law.
But now, 229 days before the sun finally sets on Britain's empire in Asia, attention is shifting to who will be running the show for China after Patten sails away.
In the first round of the process on Friday, the Selection Committee members will propose candidates for the chief executive who will step into Patten's shoes next year.
To enter the final run-off for the job, a candidate must be nominated by at least 50 members of the committee on Friday. The committee meets again on December 11 to pick the winner.
The leading candidates are all acceptable to China, sources close to the committee say.
In the forefront of the leadership battle are Tung and former chief judge Ti Liang Yang. An opinion poll gave Yang a 10 percentage point lead over Tung in public popularity this week.
Businessman Peter Woo and former appeals judge Simon Li came a remote third and fourth, and four other little known candidates scored less than one percent in the public's ratings.
However, it is not the public who vote, but the committee, and inside that body the real lobbying campaign is unfolding.
"We have a process which is laid down and I think it's clear the polls don't determine the winner," said Woo.
The committee was formed in Beijing two weeks ago and is dominated by pro-Beijing political and business groups.
