China launched the contest to pick Hong Kong's future leader on Friday, hailing the event as the birth of "real democracy" in the British-ruled territory which is set to revert to Beijing's control next year.
But pro-democracy protesters disagreed -- they stormed into the building where Hong Kong's rich and mighty had gathered to vote, and, waving imitation black coffins, they denounced the exercise as the death of freedom.
Only 400 of Hong Kong's 6.3 million people are participating in the voting, having joined a special Selection Committee set up under China's close supervision.
Shipping tycoon Tung Chee-hwa and his principal rival, former Chief Justice Ti Liang Yang both scored more than the minimum of 50 votes required to reach the next leg of the contest to select the first post-colonial Chief Executive.
Tung took a commanding lead with 206 votes. Also through to round two is businessman Peter Woo, but five contenders including former appeals court judge Simon Li fell out of the race.
The run-off will be on December 11.
The gathering of the Selection Committee, inaugurated by China's Foreign Minister Qian Qichen, who was visiting the territory for the first time, was marred by scuffles when pro-democracy activists clashed with police.
A dozen demonstrators scrambled into the plush Hong Kong Convention Centre in an unsuccessful bid to disrupt the historic meeting. Police chased protesters up six floors of escalators before they were rounded up and detained.
Outside, a police officer received a bloody nose and three more demonstrators were carted away in scuffles between about 40 activists and 100 police.
In his inauguration speech Qian declared the selection process as the dawn of genuine democracy in Hong Kong.
"For Hong Kong's people to elect their own chief executive, that is something unprecedented in Hong Kong's history," he said.
"For some 150 years Britain has appointed 20 or so Hong Kong governors, and when were the views of Hong Kong people ever consulted?" Qian asked the assembled caucus.
"The establishment of the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region (SAR) is the start of real democracy in Hong Kong, and not the end of democracy in Hong Kong," he said.
Hong Kong reverts to China at midnight next June 30.
Tung, 59, Yang, 67, and Woo, 50, are now the only hopefuls left in the race, and Qian was at pains to stress that despite claims by critics that the winner had been chosen in advance by China's communist rulers, the result was not preordained.
The democracy activists brandished posters of jailed Chinese dissidents Wang Dan and Wei Jingsheng and banners condemning China's plan to replace Hong Kong's elected legislature.
"Free Wang Dan, release Wei Jingsheng, oppose the provisional legislature", they shouted through loudhailers.
The democracy lobby brands the leadership race undemocratic and has campaigned against the provisional legislature.
"The provisional legislature is a great step backwards for democracy," one protest banner said on Friday.
British Foreign Secretary Malcolm Rifkind warned China on Thursday its plans for a provisional legislature risked creating "confusion and uncertainty" in Hong Kong.
"China would have to explain to Hong Kong and the world why they had chosen to replace a body for which more than a million Hong Kong people voted by one chosen by a handpicked electorate of only 400," he told a parliamentary debate in London.
