A shipping tycoon whose company was bailed out by Beijing when it was sinking years ago is poised to govern Hong Kong when China takes over next year, after a thumping victory in the first round of the ballot.
Tung Chee-hwa swept up 206 of the votes cast on Friday by an exclusive club of 400 Hong Kong's rich and influential, who were selected for the purpose under Beijing's close supervision.
The runner-up, former chief judge Ti Liang Yang scored 82. A third candidate, businessman Peter Woo, came in with 54. The trio were the only candidates to get the minimum 50 votes required to go through to the deciding round on December 11.
If an election were held by universal suffrage, however, Yang would get 35.7 percent and Tung 33.5 percent, an opinion poll by a local university showed after the vote.
Tung, 59, recently revealed for the first time that China had helped salvage his family shipping empire 11 years ago by backing a US$120 million syndicated fund led by pro-Beijing tycoon Henry Fok, a kingmaker in today's leadership contest.
"I know there were mainland funds in it. I'm sure. To Mr Fok and those who have helped me...I am very grateful," Tung said.
Fok went to pains after Friday's vote to assure reporters for half an hour that the rescue package was above board and had not entailed any political deal on the future of Hong Kong.
"I don't think he is returning favours to China by running for the Chief Executive," Fok said.
"Commercial relations are strictly what we have with those what you call Chinese-funded banks. We deposit our money there or we borrow money from them -- it is strictly normal commercial relations," Fok said.
Tung has long been viewed as Beijing's favoured candidate to become Hong Kong's Chief Executive when Britain hands its last Asian colony back to China at midnight next June 30.
Foreign Minister Qian Qichen gave fresh assurances on Friday that the winner had not been preordained by Chinese leaders.
Many in Hong Kong are convinced that a demonstrative personal handshake that Tung received from President Jiang Zemin in January was a deliberate cue.
Tung has tried to shake off the impression that despite the existence of other candidates it is really a one-horse race.
"I dont think it is a foregone conclusion. It's three weeks away to December 11...and I will have to be working very hard to make sure that I win on that day," he told Reuters Television after the first round vote.
"The process of nomination today was done in a very transparent manner," he said.
Some analysts, noting that Tung had scored more than 50 percent, wondered if a second round was worth the bother and suggested that Yang and Woo might as well bow out.
"For, if the ultimate purpose of running is to win, then there is little point in them carrying on," said political commentator C.K. Lau.
Tung, a striking figure with spiky grey hair and a boxer's stance, is noted for his cautious style and modesty.
He and his rivals will be interviewed by the committee members at the end of the month on their policies and attitudes.
So far he has emphasised the importance of the economy and business, and has taken a conservative view on ticklish issues such as human rights and democracy, advocating "consensus rather than confrontation" in dealings with China's communist rulers.
Speculation has abounded in Hong Kong that some of its business titans may have been secret card carrying members of the Chinese Communist Party for years. But Tung's name has until now not figured among these rumours.
