Shipping magnate Tung Chee-hwa saw his fortunes almost dashed on the rocks in the 1980s when the family company met ill winds, but Beijing bailed him out and now he is poised to become Hong Kong's next leader.
Next month, China's carefully screened Selection Committee will choose a Chief Executive to run Hong Kong after Britain hands its last important colony back to Beijing in mid-1997.
Tung appears streets ahead of his rivals, having run away with 206 of the 400 votes in the first round of balloting on Friday.
Behind him were retired Chief Justice Yang Ti Liang, who scored 82 votes, and businessman Peter Woo, who clocked up 54.
In the public's eyes, Yang is slightly more popular than Tung, according to recent opinion polls.
Tung has been a senior member of a Preparatory Committee of pro-Beijing Hong Kong notables and mainland China officials, charged with crafting the power structures which will replace British colonial rule.
Tung was lauded as an impartial and honest counsellor by Governor Chris Patten when he stepped down in June this year from Patten's advisory cabinet, the Executive Council.
The shipping tycoon resigned in October as head of his family firm, Orient Overseas (International) Ltd, to make his leadership bid.
Tung's early campaigning consisted of clearing the decks of speculation that might lead to challenges on his integrity, such as how China had once saved his family from bankruptcy.
Tung took the helm of the business after his father died in 1979. He has publicly acknowledged that China had helped bail out the firm 11 years ago by backing a US$120 million investment fund for the firm, led by tycoon Henry Fok, a kingmaker in today's leadership contest. The family later bought back most of the company's shares and restored its control of the firm.
"In 1985 and '86 we went through a very difficult time when the shipping business was in serious recession. Henry Fok led a syndicate of investment in our company," Tung said.
"I know there were mainland funds in it. I'm sure. To Mr Fok and those who have helped me...I am very grateful."
Tung was spotted as a possible favourite of China when President Jiang Zemin singled him out for a personal handshake at a meeting in Beijing this year.
But Tung is believed to be acceptable also to Britain and to expatriate business leaders who hope he will form a "dream team" with incumbent Chief Secretary Anson Chan -- Hong Kong's top civil servant -- if China allows her to stay on after the flag change at midnight next June 30.
Tung has links with the powerful in key capitals -- Beijing, Taipei, London and Washington -- whose influence will be important for Hong Kong's evolution after 1997.
Born in Shanghai in 1937, Tung was educated at Liverpool University in Britain.
The 59-year-old tycoon who has previously dodged the limelight, is said to lead a disciplined life. He was known for arriving at his office at dawn to perform tai chi exercises on the roof before starting work.
Despite a reputation for modesty, wisdom and caution, and strong ties to China, Tung's local power base may ultimately stir some unease in Beijing. "It is hard to see Beijing favouring someone with a local power base, who really means to run the show," said legislator and lawyer Margaret Ng.
Tung has made a point of tapping various views, including those of pro-democracy parties and trade unions.
But he has also made increasingly strident pro-China policy utterances. He accused Patten of splitting Hong Kong's 6.3 million people through a speech that assailed China's plan to replace the elected legislature with an appointed assembly.
He has urged people to forget China's bloody army crackdown on the 1989 democracy movement in Beijing and to leave it to historians to judge the event.
