As U.S. President Bill Clinton jumped into Asian foreign policy issues with a new enthusiasm on Wednesday, security experts meeting in Hong Kong called on all countries involved to ensure no conflict flared up over Taiwan.
Experts said U.S. policy on China and Asia was maturing, and they called for the status quo in Taiwan to continue in the interests of wider Asia-Pacific security and prosperity.
"Next to Korea, the Taiwan Strait is the second major potential security flashpoint in the region," David Shambaugh of the George Washington University in the United States said.
"This is not a back-burner issue. It can quickly ignite and get on to the front burner... It is an issue we have to keep our eye on," he said, adding that any flareup over Taiwan would severely damage the region's bustling commerce.
Shambaugh was talking at a discussion panel of security experts at the World Economic Forum's Europe/East Asia meeting.
He said Taiwan President Lee Teng-hui and other Taiwan leaders should restrain themselves and that the time would be riper for dialogue with Beijing after China holds a watershed Communist Party congress next year.
At the same time, China should renounce the use of force and coercive diplomacy towards Taiwan and respect Taiwan's autonomy within a "one-China" formula. China should not expect Taipei "to negotiate with a gun to its head", Shambaugh said.
China-Taiwan relations have been tense over the past two years as pro-independence sentiment grew in Taiwan and Beijing launched a drive for the reintegration of its lost territories.
Taiwan, historically part of China, has been separated from the mainland for most of the past century, first by 50 years of Japanese occupation, then when China's nationalist government lost a civil war to the communists in 1949 and fled to Taipei.
China regards Taiwan as a rebel province and has threatened to use force if the island seeks formal independence.
In March this year, as Taiwan went to the polls, a major crisis blew up when China launched missile tests and briefly blockaded Taiwan to deter Taipei from declaring independence.
"We should maintain the status quo," Yuan Ming, a strategic studies expert from Beijing University, said on Wednesday.
The view was echoed by Masashi Nishihara from Japan's National Defence Academy, who said Taiwan should not provoke China by seeking a United Nations seat.
Another expert, Gerald Segal of the International Institute for Strategic Studies in London, said the United States successfully defended the strategic balance and at the same time managed to stop short of a conflict when it sent two aircraft carriers into seas near Taiwan as a warning to China during the March crisis.
But he warned that the arms race in the region, where many governments were newly democratic but politically very fragile, threatened stability.
Visiting Australia on Wednesday, Clinton said the United States was more determined than ever to be involved in Asia, to help provide stability, that China should not be isolated and that engaging Beijing was a "big priority".
At the same time Secretary of State Warren Christopher was in Beijing shoring up relations. Clinton is to meet Chinese President Jiang Zemin at next week's summit of the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation forum in the Philippines.
Shambaugh said the flurry of high-level contacts now and in the near future between Beijing and Washington was important for building the Sino-U.S. relationship.
But he said Chinese officials would remain suspicious that the United States had a "subversion agenda" for China and that the policy of engagement was actually an attempt at containment.
