Signals from Hong Kong's likely future leader that the Chinese Communist Party might become legal in the territory in 1997 raised concerns in the pro-democracy camp on Wednesday about the party's future power.
Concern was stirred up after the man tipped as the favourite to become Hong Kong's chief executive, shipping tycoon Tung Chee-hwa, said on Tuesday he would accept the Communist Party's legalisation after the British colony reverts to China.
London is handing Hong Kong back at midnight next June 30, and Tung is the frontrunner to lead it after he received 51 percent of the votes in the first round of a ballot last week by the 400-member selection committee organised by China.
Although China is ruled by the Communist Party, Beijing has promised Hong Kong wide-ranging autonomy, leaving its capitalist system intact for 50 years under a policy of "Hong Kong people running Hong Kong" and "one country, two systems".
"The most important thing is, what will be the role of the Communist Party in Hong Kong after the handover, because whether it's legal or not it is here," legislator Emily Lau told Reuters.
Many people in Hong Kong have speculated that the future Chief Executive will be stage-managed by a Communist overlord from Beijing. China has publicly denied this is the plan.
Tung said on Tuesday in response to a reporter's question that he would accept the party's legalisation if asked to do so.
"That's totally unnecessary. It's already there," said Martin Lee, leader of the Democratic Party, Hong Kong's largest.
The democracy camp is worried about what power, if any, the Communist Party might wield over Hong Kong, which is supposed to be administratively separate from the rest of China.
"Let's be realistic. China is dominated by the Communist Party and the Communist party already has an office here in the form of the Xinhua News Agency headed by Zhou Nan," independent lawmaker Christine Loh told Reuters.
"In the future after 1997 there is no reason to continue to pretend the Communist Party is not here," Loh said.
"But the problem is the Communist party isn't just an ordinary political party. In China it dominates the political and governmental institutions. So what we want to know is that its presence here would not represent interference," she said.
A Hong Kong security authority spokesman said the Communist Party is not legally registered in Hong Kong and, therefore, does not exist in the eyes of the law.
Hong Kong's colonial authorities outlawed all political parties. Since 1990, however, they have been allowed to register under the societies ordinance. As a result, parties such as Lee's Democrats are registered as societies.
But, "The Communist Party is not registered under the societies ordinance and we've received no application from them for registration," chief government spokesman Kerry McGlynn told Reuters. He declined to comment further.
A government source said the government never talks about the issue in detail. "When a politician raised the issue last year, the government's spokespersons just looked down and mumbled into their beards."
"In terms of legalising it, I'm not aware that the Communist Party is actually illegal, but we know it's not legally constituted by being registered," Loh said.
In the past, the party was involved in violent conflicts with the colonial government, especially the Hong Kong riots of 1967 inspired by China's radical-left Cultural Revolution.
