A Chinese plan for 6,000 People's Liberation Army (PLA) troops to march into Hong Kong the very minute Britain hands the colony back to China in 1997 would send the world a bad signal, diplomats said on Thursday.
The Financial Times of London reported that China had told Britain it intends to march 6,000 troops across the border into Hong Kong when Beijing takes over at midnight next June 30.
Bill Dickson, a spokesman for the Foreign Office mission in Hong Kong, told Reuters that China had announced no such plan to the British side in ongoing handover negotiations.
"Although we've been discussing the transfer of defence responsibilities with the Chinese and are of course discussing arrangements for the handover ceremony itself, the Chinese have not told us of their plans for moving defence forces into Hong Kong after midnight on the first of July," Dickson said.
"This is a matter which is entirely for them, but if reports such as that in the Financial Times are true, then the question arises whether this sort of display of military force conveys the right message to the rest of the world," he said.
In Beijing, China said it would station troops in Hong Kong after it regained sovereignty next year, but the number would depend on defence requirements.
"The central government will send an appropriate number of troops into Hong Kong" after the transfer of power next year, Foreign Ministry spokesman Cui Tiankai said.
"The actual number will be based on the defence needs of Hong Kong," Cui told reporters, without saying when the troops would be moved into the territory.
Diplomats in Hong Kong, who asked not to be identified, said the plan outlined in the newspaper report seemed very credible given China's hardline stance on many handover-related issues.
"We have made it absolutely clear to the Chinese that it would be far better, if they want to send the right signal, if they would build up their armed forces in Hong Kong in a gradual way, over a period of time," one British source said.
"Of course we got no response," the source said.
"This would be exactly the kind of thing to send a shiver down Hong Kong's spine, and would raise questions about China's commitment to a smooth transition," a Western diplomat said.
Hong Kong is switching back to the Chinese flag after a century and a half as a colony on China's southern doorstep.
The approaching handover has been frought with jitters. Many of the territory's 6.3 million people fear a crackdown against human rights, democracy and press freedom, as well as possible trouble with the PLA soldiers, after the transfer.
For most people in Hong Kong, the PLA conjures up images of the bloody military crackdown that was unleashed, with heavy loss of life, against the student-led pro-democracy movement in Beijing's Tiananmen Square in June 1989.
Britain and China have been sparring lately in handover negotiations over whether or not a PLA advance party in Hong Kong can carry weapons before the handover.
Also disputed is whether PLA garrison soldiers should be put on trial in Hong Kong courts if they commit crimes in the territory.
Under a proposed law drawn up unilaterally by China, the PLA troops would be tried in military courts on the mainland, not civilian courts in Hong Kong.
