A former top judge who is vying to lead Hong Kong after China takes over next year has said the territory needs a neutral and impartial leader rather than a well-connected tycoon, and one who is tolerant towards dissent.
"I'm for tolerance," Yang Ti Liang, one of three candidates trying to become Hong Kong's first chief executive after Britain hands the colony back to China at midnight next June 30, told Reuters in an interview.
The 67-year-old Shanghai-born former chief justice, who shed his British knighthood a month ago, came through this month's first round of voting by a 400-strong China-backed Selection Committee with 82 of the votes.
He was well behind frontrunner Tung Chee-hwa, a shipping tycoon with strong China links who scored 206 votes, but ahead of another entrepreneur, Peter Woo, who scraped through with 54.
Tung has often been depicted as Beijing's favourite in the race. But Yang, who has emerged as the people's favourite in some recent opinion polls, and once with a lead of as many as 10 percentage points, is battling on, even though there will be no public vote for the top post.
"Of course the votes indicated that certainly the Selection Committee favours Tung much more than they favour me. It's an uphill battle. It's not easy. But I think there's still hope," Yang said.
Over the coming week candidates will be quizzed by committee members on their policies ahead of their final vote on December 11.
Asked if the committee was likely to heed his popularity with the public, Yang said: "I think to a certain extent it will. I don't think they will follow the poll to the letter. If there's a vast difference shown between candidates in the polls, the committee will have to take note."
Yang's campaign headquarters is a modest, cramped office rented in a hotel, in marked contrast the plush executive suites occupied by Tung. The "campaign" is a crusade to lobby business and interest groups, not the general public.
Yang described his greatest strength in comparison with Tung as his long experience as a fair, unbiased arbiter.
"I have no business connections or political connections ... having been a judge for the past 30 years. I am somebody above politics, above connections, neutral, impartial, as opposed to somebody who is very much in business and whose contact with the Chinese government is very good," he said.
"I think anybody who has a huge network with other people does give rise to the problem as to whether, if eventually selected, he might not be perceived to be influenced by these connections when making a decision."
Yang said Hong Kong's future leader would not face a test of courage in standing up to Beijing's communist rulers to resist pressure for a crackdown on anti-communist dissenters and pro-democracy activists.
"It's not a question of being brave or not brave. It's a question of looking at the letter of the law and seeing what it allows," he said. "I want to be on the side of tolerance."
He said he hoped a law on sedition, treason and subversion required by Beijing would not be enacted by the controversial interim legislature that China plans to install at the handover, but by a new long-term legislature to be elected in 1998.
Yang also said he believed the Chinese Communist Party, which has long operated underground and behind the scenes in Hong Kong, should register as a party under local law if it planned to be active in the territory after 1997.
