Britain risked China's wrath on Tuesday by proposing new laws on subversion in Hong Kong, laying down legal markers intended to head off Chinese-style jailings of dissidents after Beijing takes over the colony in 1997.
The colonial government unveiled draft amendments to Hong Kong's criminal law, ordered by Governor Chris Patten's cabinet, to cover crimes of subversion and secession. The bill will go to the Legislative Council next Wednesday.
Britain's move, after months of fruitless exchanges with China on the issue, was an effort to set down legal standards for China to follow after Beijing takes control of the territory at midnight next June 30, British officials said.
But the move was promptly attacked by Chinese officials. A spokesman for China's de facto embassy, the Xinhua News Agency office, was quoted by a local Beijing-controlled news agency as saying Britain had "violated promises on the transition" and London "must bear all the consequences of its actions".
Under a post-1997 Hong Kong constitution promulgated by China, the Basic Law, the territory must add laws against secession and subversion to the statute book after the handover.
Until now China has indicated it will have the law enacted by a new legislature it planned to install after the sovereignty transfer, sparking fears in Hong Kong that it will bring in draconian communist-style laws clamping down on dissent.
Mainland China has always eyed Hong Kong as a potential base of subversion, ever since revolutionaries used it as one of their bases against the imperial Manchu dynasty in the last century.
A Legislative Council motion in January urged the Hong Kong government to introduce pre-emptive laws on the issue to protect the civil rights of Hong Kong's 6.3 million people.
Fears were aggravated by remarks made by senior Chinese officials this year including Foreign Minister Qian Qichen and Beijing's Hong Kong policy chief Lu Ping, who set clear limits on post-1997 freedom of expression in the territory.
Britain's draft bill proposes adding the crimes of secession and subversion to the existing criminal law and clarifies the definition of seditious activity. It removes references to the present sovereign Queen Elizabeth, and refers only to Britain.
"It would not be desirable to leave a legislative gap in this important and sensitive area," an official said.
"It is quite clear that it is the view of the community that we should seek to have legislation on these concepts in place before July 1, 1997," said Secretary for Security Peter Lai.
The changes take a form that makes them easily adaptable by the future government of the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region (SAR) that China will install, an official said, adding that all that would have to be changed in the law after 1997 would be the name of the sovereign state from Britain to China.
Under the amended law, sedition would carry a maximum jail term of two years, subversion and secession 10 years, and treason life imprisonment. In China these crimes can earn a death sentence. In Hong Kong the death penalty is non-existent.
The draft law makes clear the offences are related to the use of force to attempt to overthrow the government, and not to non-violent criticism of the regime or of the political system as in China, officials said.
"What the British seem to be doing is to set down legal standards that would give space to non-violent critics and dissenters -- a law that wouldn't put people like Wei Jingsheng or Wang Dan in jail," a source close to the government said.
Wei, the father of the Chinese democracy movement, and former student leader Wang Dan, were both given lengthy jail terms in China this year for subversion.
Both dissidents had criticised the government orally and in their writings and had called for democratic change in China, but neither man had resorted to violence.
