Britain and China clashed over the future of Hong Kong on Wednesday as the colonial power took steps to bring in a pre-emptive new law on subversion ahead of the capitalist territory's 1997 return to communist-ruled China.
The quarrel was ignited when the government on Tuesday laid down legal markers defining the concepts of treason, sedition, subversion and secession in a bid to head off Chinese-style jailings of dissidents after Beijing takes over the colony.
The draft bill would jail only people who plot the violent overthrow of government, not non-violent critics and dissidents.
Chinese officials in Hong Kong immediately attacked the move and pro-China politicians said the law would probably be erased and replaced after China resumes sovereignty at midnight next June 30, when a century and a half of colonial rule expires.
A senior negotiator on the Hong Kong handover, Chen Zuo'er, told reporters Britain should not have acted unilaterally, but declined to say if China would repeal the bill if it became law.
A spokesman for China's de facto embassy in the territory attacked the move more sharply. "Britain violated its promise that all major issues must be decided through negotiations with China in the latter stage of transition," the spokesman said.
"Britain will have to take responsibility for all the consequences of amending this law," the spokesman said.
British officials said they were confident the bill could get through the Legislative Council (Legco) next Wednesday. But some pro-China politicians and analysts were sceptical.
"The move itself is bound to be futile. Even if the bill is passed by the present Legco, I don't think there is any chance that it can survive the handover," said Tsang Yok-sing, leader of the biggest pro-Beijing political party in the territory.
"This decision will not be useful because the Chinese side will eventually roll back all the reforms undertaken by the Hong Kong government before July 1997," said analyst Sunny Lo at the Chinese University of Hong Kong.
"The Hong Kong government is trying to commit suicide by putting this legislation through Legco," Lo said.
He said China would want a broader definition of subversion that would include subversion in non-violent forms.
Beijing had previously said it opposed any major changes to Hong Kong's criminal law before the change of flag.
Governor Chris Patten, often vilified by Chinese officials, said the government had taken the step only after 17 months of efforts to clinch agreement with China had failed.
He challenged China to say exactly what it objected to in the proposed new bill.
"We've tried to establish in a very reasonable way what these crimes should actually mean," Patten told Hong Kong radio during a visit to Japan. "On this particular issue we really have been negotiating...with a brick wall," he said.
"There's been no response, no give at all," he said, adding that the only alternative to the bill would have been to break the government's word to Legco and the community that it would take action on the issue and ensure Hong Kong's "decent way of life" would not be "swept away" next July.
Independent pro-democracy legislator Emily Lau said she hoped China would not repeal the law, adding that if it did, "that will definitely cause instability in Hong Kong, and it will be a very high price for both China and Hong Kong to pay."
Treason and sedition are already on Hong Kong's law books.
The last time somebody was prosecuted for sedition was in 1953, and for treason in 1946. But These offences have since largely fallen.
Subversion and secession however are new concepts in the law required by China in Hong Kong's post-1997 constitution, known as the Basic Law.
