Chief Executive candidate Tung Chee-hwa, rated by a poll as the best man to deal with China after Britain leaves Hong Kong next year, said a proposed subversion law faces review by the post-colonial government.
"The Basic Law (Hong Kong's post-handover constitution) clearly states that it is up to the future government to draw up its own law on these matters," Tung told about 100 members of the 400-strong Selection Committee that will choose Hong Kong's future leader.
"The Special Administrative Region government will have to review these issues after the handover."
Britain hands its colony back to Beijing at midnight next June 30. The China-controlled Selection Committee is in the midst of a three-day vetting of Tung and two rivals who are bidding to succeed colonial Governor Chris Patten.
The winner will be announced on December 11.
On Tuesday, Britain began the process of bringing in a law on subversion, laying down legal markers defining the concepts of treason, sedition, subversion and secession in a bid to head off Chinese-style jailings of dissidents after the handover.
China has condemned the move but stopped short of saying whether the law would be scrapped when it takes over the territory.
Tung, a billionaire shipping tycoon, also told the committee that Hong Kong should stand by China if Beijing is under sanction by foreign powers.
"If sanction is for political reasons then we have to consider Hong Kong's position. Maybe Hong Kong has to make some sacrifices," he said.
An opinion poll released on Thursday showed Tung to be the favourite among the 967 respondents and indicated 73 percent of them also believed Tung was the candidate best able to communicate with the Chinese government.
The poll, conducted by the Chinese University of Hong Kong, showed that only 7.2 percent thought former chief justice Ti Liang Yang could commmunicate well with Beijing while businessman Peter Woo scored only two percent.
But Yang was seen as being the most impartial of the three and the one most ready to voice his opinion to China.
Asked who was most likely to speak out against Beijing, 31 percent said Yang, 20 percent Tung and 4.8 percent Woo.
After the first day of questioning by the committee on Wednesday, Tung emerged as a better communicator than he had during previous occasions, analysts said.
They said he produced a clearly focused vision for Hong Kong, with the main thrust on putting business and economic interests first.
During the quizzing by committee members representing Hong Kong's business community, Tung blasted the Democratic Party, Hong Kong's largest, urging it to drop its anti-China stance and to play a positive role in the transition for the sake of Hong Kong's 6.3 million people.
"At present they are objecting to anything Chinese," Tung said. "This is not good in the long term or for the interests of Hong Kong."
The Democrats are boycotting the Selection Committee, condemning its mission to pick the post-colonial leader as undemocratic and its task of assembling a new provisional body to supplant the elected legislature as a violation of handover pledges made by China.
