Hong Kong shipping tycoon Tung Chee-hwa was rated by a poll on Thursday as the best man to deal with China as a Beijing-controlled committee grilled candidates vying to run the territory when Britain pulls out in 215 days.
Britain hands its colony back to Chinese sovereignty at the stroke of midnight next June 30, and the 400-strong Selection Committee is in the midst of a three-day vetting of Tung and two rivals bidding to succeed colonial Governor Chris Patten.
The winner will be announced on December 11.
The opinion poll, conducted among 967 people by the Chinese University of Hong Kong on Monday and Tuesday, showed Tung to be the favourite and indicated 73 percent of the respondents also believe Tung is the candidate who can communicate best with the Chinese government in Beijing.
Only 7.2 percent thought his rival, former chief judge Ti Liang Yang could commmunicate well with Beijing, while another candidate, businessman Peter Woo, scored only two percent.
Yang, however, was seen as being more impartial and as the man most ready to voice his opinion to China, the poll showed.
Asked who was most likely to speak out against Beijing, 31 percent said Yang, 20 percent Tung and 4.8 percent Woo.
After the first day's questioning of the candidates by the committee on Wednesday, Tung emerged as a better communicator than he has appeared on previous occasions, analysts said.
He produced a clearly focused vision for Hong Kong with the main thrust on putting business and economic interests first.
During the quizzing by committee members representing Hong Kong's business community, Tung blasted the Democratic Party, Hong Kong's largest, urging it to drop its anti-China stance and to play a positive role in the transition for the sake of Hong Kong's 6.3 million people.
"At present they are objecting to anything Chinese," Tung said. "This is not good in the long term or for the interests of Hong Kong," he said. "They should not think in this way."
The Democrats are boycotting the Selection Committee, condemning its mission to pick Hong Kong's post-colonial leader as undemocratic and its activity to assemble a new provisional body to supplant the present elected legislature as a violation of handover pledges made by China.
Tung, delivering his policy platform in a speech to the body, outlined a new era in which he would pack his advisory cabinet with specialists and include legislators -- now excluded from the equivalent colonial body.
He also said he would like to retain all the senior local officials of the civil service in sign that he might keep on the present and highly regarded Chief Secretary Anson Chan.
Among his policy initiatives, Tung listed the revival of manufacturing industries, especially with a high-tech focus.
In recent years manufacturing has shifted out of Hong Kong to cheaper locations in mainland China, and Hong Kong has become a service-based economy.
Tung also said he wanted to boost the role of provident funds and social security. He said he would press for faster approval of construction plans, the sale of public housing to tenants at affordable prices, the release of more government land for housing, and a reduction of red tape.
He said he had a sense of mission to work for Hong Kong's good. "My father C.Y. Tung had always taught me to do meaningful things and to be proud of being a Chinese," he said. "It is this sense of mission that drives me."
