Shipping boss Tung Chee-hwa emerged as the most vocally pro-China contender for Hong Kong's leadership on Friday as a Beijing-controlled body wrapped up a three-day quiz of three men vying to rule Hong Kong after 1997.
The Selection Committee of 400 rich or influential Hong Kong people, who were picked under China's close supervision, will now ponder. But many believe Tung is the preordained winner.
The committee meets again on December 11 to make its choice.
Tung shot off a volley of comments and answers to committee members underlining his loyalty to China, attacked the politics of British Governor Chris Patten, and even threw in a snub about the inauspicious qualities of Patten's official residence.
Hong Kong reverts to Chinese rule at the stroke of midnight next June 30 after more than 150 years as a British colony.
Beijing is turning the territory of 6.3 million people into a Special Administrative Region of communist China, pledging no change to its thriving capitalist system for 50 years.
The committee's choice of a chief executive to succeed Patten was obvious, the pro-business Economic Journal said on Friday. "We get the feeling that winner and loser in the chief executive contest is already decided," it said.
Tung Chee-hwa's answers were all "politically correct", showing a "cautious nature" that suited the taste of Beijing and many Hong Kong people, the journal said.
In his remarks, Tung jumped to China's defence and attacked an attempt by Britain this week to introduce a pre-emptive soft subversion law before the 1997 handover aimed at ensuring no China-style jailings of dissidents take place after 1997.
"It is up to the future government to draw up its own law on these matters," Tung said. "The Special Administrative Region government will have to review these issues after the handover."
Tung, 59, who quit as head of the Orient Overseas shipping empire to bid for Hong Kong's leadership, has been tipped as China's favoured son since Chinese President Jiang Zemin singled him out for a handshake in Beijing in January.
In the three days of committee interrogation, much of which was broadcast live, Tung's rivals -- former chief judge Ti Liang Yang and entrepreneur Peter Woo -- also gave voice to patriotism but were glaringly less pro-China in their utterances.
Yang made clear he would not always bend with Beijing's wind or whim, but would follow the letter of Hong Kong law.
"I'm for Yang because he's for justice," said a Hong Kong Chinese resident listening to the sessions on the radio.
"He's a fair man. He's not a merchant," he said, summing up a widely held view of the contest.
Tung said Hong Kong might have to make sacrifices if China fell victim to political or diplomatic sanctions.
He stressed Chinese cultural values and patriotic education and the need for less red tape, speedier land development approvals, a sell-off of low-price public housing to tenants, and setting an example of Chinese reunification for Taiwan to follow later.
"I found it abominable...I found him more colonial than the colonial government," said legislator Tsang Kin-shing.
Tsang, whose Democratic Party is boycotting the leadership contest, said Tung's rivals were no better. "They are all foul grass growing from a foul jar," he said, using a colloquial Chinese insult.
Tung also said he would not like to move into the governor's traditional residence next year. "I have heard the Government House is crowded and the fung shui is not good."
Many Hong Kong Chinese cling to fung shui, "wind and water", a mixture of science and superstition that people use to chart their lives, birthdays, weddings, business and burials.
