With China's takeover of Hong Kong rapidly looming, the British colony faces a swirl of politics and diplomatic jousting in the week ahead, the last before China names the territory's first post-colonial governor.
British and Chinese negotiators, often sparring over the details of the sovereignty transfer, will meet on Wednesday for three days in their latest bargaining round.
Chinese sources said China is likely to lash out during the Joint Liaison Group session at a British attempt to foist a soft subversion law on the territory before the mid-1997 handover.
Last Tuesday Britain announced a draft bill that would make crimes such as subversion and sedition a crime only if they entailed violence, making clear mere dissident-style criticism of the authorities was not a crime.
China has denounced the move. "This will only cause disruption and instability in Hong Kong," China's spokesman in Hong Kong Zhang Junsheng said on Friday. Some members of the pro-China lobby predicted the law would be replaced by a more Chinese-style legislation after the handover on July 1.
The territory is also preparing for a visit by U.S. Assistant Secretary of State Winston Lord on Wednesday.
Lord, who is also heading for China amid signs of a thaw in Sino-U.S. ties, plans to meet Governor Chris Patten and his deputy Anson Chan, as well as China's hardline envoy in the territory, Zhou Nan, and shipping tycoon Tung Chee-hwa, the favourite in the contest to be the first post-colonial leader.
Critics said Lord's meeting with Tung would be an undiplomatic signal from the United States tantamount to Washington picking the winner in the contest.
Fresh attacks on China are also expected on Wednesday from democrats in Hong Kong's elected legislature, which is set to be dissolved upon the handover and replaced with a new provisional body assembled under China's supervision.
Last week a Selection Committee of 400 rich or influential Hong Kong people, formed under China's careful control, quizzed Tung and two rivals over their policies and attitude to China.
Tung, 59, emerged as the most vocally pro-China contender, loosing off a volley of remarks that stressed loyalty and patriotism to China, attacked Patten's politics and threw in a snub on the inauspicious quality of the governor's residence.
The tycoon also suggested the Democratic Party, the territory's largest, should stop confronting China if it wanted to participate in post-handover political establishment, which drew an attack from Patten.
"You can't, nobody can, freeze out of the political debate in Hong Kong, out of the dialogue about Hong Kong's future, those who represent majority opinion in Hong Kong," Patten told Hong Kong's government-funded radio on Saturday during his visit to Japan.
The 400-member Committee will meet again on December 11 to vote for the new chief executive. Most people now consider Tung's rivals Ti Liang Yang, a former chief judge, and businessman Peter Woo, rank outsiders.
Many Hong Kong people were unimpressed by last week's performances, not least the territory's pro-democracy camp.
"Only empty promises and brief outlines were provided in their platforms," said legislator Fred Li of the Democratic Party.
He decried the fact Hong Kong's voters were not involved in choosing among the three contenders. "All they need is the blessing of these 400 people," Li said.
