Canadian envoys on Tuesday dismissed reports that thousands of Hong Kong people in Canada may be forced to flock home en masse ahead of Hong Kong's 1997 handover to China in order to protect their residence rights.
Canada's commissioner in Hong Kong, Garrett Lambert, and the country's ambasador to China, Howard Balloch, said they believed China would soon decide on the issue, which has been a stumbling block in Sino-British talks on the territory.
But Lambert said Hong Kong people who had emigrated from the British colony might have to live in Hong Kong as Canadians in future and lose their local voting rights after it becomes a Special Administrative Region (SAR) of China on July 1, 1997.
Lambert told reporters he had been informed by China's envoy in Hong Kong, Zhou Nan, that progress was being made by Chinese and British negotiators on the problem of right of abode.
The question is one of the major unresolved issues facing the Sino-British Joint Liaison Group (JLG), which meets this Wednesday.
"This is a good file. It's one on which progress is being made. Mr Zhou said he expected that we would have a decision announced in the JLG soon -- my guess is probably in early January," Lambert said.
"It now seems fairly obvious that you do not have to be physically present in Hong Kong to protect your interests if you are already a permanent resident of Hong Kong before the transition," he said.
However, Lambert said questions remained about political and working rights of Hong Kong emigrants who return to live in the territory after 1997.
Of all Western nations, Canada has one of the largest immigration relationships with Hong Kong.
Apart from some 500,000 Hong Kong people who have emigrated to Canada in recent years, some 30,000 Canadian citizens live in Hong Kong, many of them originally Hong Kong citizens.
Press reports in Hong Kong have quoted British officials warning of a chaotic mass return of Hong Kong emigrants if China insists on them being in Hong Kong in person on the July 1 handover day in order to keep their residence rights.
Chinese officials have said in the past that this would be their bottom line, but the JLG has reached no agreement on it.
Canada has delayed a decision on granting visa-free entry to holders of a new Hong Kong passport to be issued after the handover, pending guarantees from China on the repatriation of Chinese who enter Canada illegally.
Replying to a reporter on Tuesday, Lambert denied Canada had any grounds to believe the SAR passport had been compromised from a security viewpoint.
Balloch declined to confirm or deny that significant numbers of Chinese illegal immigrants had entered Canada using Hong Kong documents that were illegally issued or obtained.
The envoys also denied local press reports that Canada had received a comprehensive list of Chinese dissidents living in exile in Hong Kong, and that it planned to grant them refuge after 1997. They said some individual dissidents had come forward but declined to comment further.
