Britain and China are deadlocked on core issues central to a smooth handover of Hong Kong to Beijing in 1997, ranging from citizenship rights to subversion and troop deployments, officials said on Tuesday.
"With only 210 days to go under the British flag, time is running out fast to sort out these problems," a British official said on the eve of Sino-British talks starting on Wednesday.
"China has to decide whether it wants things to go smoothly next year or not."
British and Chinese chief negotiators meet on Wednesday for three days of talks under the Sino-British Joint Liaison Group (JLG) forum, haggling over handover details.
There have already been signs over the past week that handover talks have soured, blocking progress on major details of the flag change, set for midnight June 30 next year.
Chinese and British experts who met on Monday failed to agree on a formula for China to send an advance party of troops into Hong Kong before the handover, and last week a big quarrel flared over a liberal anti-subversion law proposed by Britain.
"We haven't made as much progress as I would have liked to have seen but we have agreed that this is an important subject," British representative Alan Paul said after the talks on troops.
"We must continue our efforts and we must meet more often on this subject," Paul said. A source close to the talks said China had yielded ground by abandoning a demand that the advance party bear arms, which Britain has publicly opposed, and that the argument was now over troop numbers.
JLG working-level negotiators were due to meet again on Tuesday to discuss citizenship and right of abode issues.
A British official said Britain was especially worried by the fact that China had come to no agreement on the terms whereby Hong Kong citizens with a domicile abroad can qualify for permanent residence in the territory after 1997.
Chinese officials have previously proposed that citizens must be back in Hong Kong on the day of the handover or lose their right of abode in the territory, which is to become an autonomous Special Administrative Region (SAR) of China.
British officials have warned that unless this problem is solved, there could be a chaotic mad rush by overseas Hong Kong people to the territory on the eve of the handover.
The main negotiations on Wednesday open against a backdrop of tension heightened by a liberal anti-subversion law that the colonial government will put to the legislature on Wednesday.
The legislation aims to set legal standards that would exclude China-style jailings of dissidents.
Britain has said China has blocked efforts to discuss the bill although handover documents require a law to be legislated on the offences of subversion, secession, sedition and treason.
Chinese officials said enactment of the law was not for the colonial government to carry out now, but for the SAR, after 1997, and they accused Governor Chris Patten of lying when he said China had blocked discussions on it.
The Legislative Council plans to launch a new motion of censure on Wednesday opposing its own abolition and China's appointment of a provisional legislature next July 1.
On Thursday, more political drama related to the handover is likely when a legislative inquiry panel summons senior officials to testify under oath about the sudden retirement of Hong Kong's immigration chief Laurence Leung last July.
Finance Secretary Donald Tsang and Leung's successor Regina Yip are both to testify. Leung's early retirement has fuelled a welter of questions among politicians about why he was permitted to depart so abruptly.
