The United States' top diplomat on Asia drew flak from leaders of Hong Kong's pro-democracy camp on Wednesday as he met key officials and politicians on the colony's 1997 return to China.
The U.S. Assistant Secretary of State Winston Lord had separate meetings with local political parties and with China's top official in the British colony, Zhou Nan.
Lord was also set to meet colonial Governor Chris Patten and his deputy, Anson Chan, as well as the man tipped as Hong Kong's first post-colonial leader, shipping magnate Tung Chee-hwa.
Pro-democracy parties criticised Lord for planning to see only one of the three candidates in the China-controlled contest to select a post-colonial successor to Patten -- tycoon Tung.
"He has adopted the conventional wisdom that Tung will be chief executive and that the other two have no chance," said legislator Emily Lau of the pro-democracy group, Frontier.
Lau said she was not invited to meet Lord. The democracy camp has accused China of preordaining Tung as winner of the contest, which will culminate on December 11, and some critics say Lord's meeting with him is helping to pick the victor.
"What's the point in seeing the others when there's only one who will become the chief executive-designate of Hong Kong," one U.S. diplomat admitted to a reporter on Wednesday.
Lau said U.S. politicians no longer followed up remarks supporting human rights and democracy with action, and that they were now interested only in making money out of China.
"If they cared about human rights and democracy they should have cancelled Secretary of State Warren Christopher's recent visit to China, to send Beijing a strong signal," Lau said.
But Christopher went there -- just one week after China had jailed leading dissident Wang Dan, she said. The U.S. has said it hopes to see Hong Kong keep its freedoms after 1997, but has stopped short of condemning Chinese plans to crimp democracy.
Legislator Yeung Sum, vice-chairman of the Democratic Party, Hong Kong's largest, said his party had told Lord of its worries about the future of press freedom, the elected legislature and the undemocratic nature of the post-1997 leadership contest.
His party had told Lord that a Chinese plan to dissolve the elected Legislative Council next July 1 and install a new provisional legislature was illegal, Yeung told reporters.
"It's a step back as far as democracy is concerned," Yeung said, branding the provisional legislature move a breach of the Sino-British treaty covering the sovereignty transfer.
Lord said Washington would continue to take a keen interest in Hong Kong after the change of flag at midnight next June 30.
"I'm here essentially for two reasons. One, to underline the United States' strong interest in a smooth reversion of Hong Kong to Chinese rule, and secondly I'm here to listen, and I'm listening to a wide spectrum of views," Lord told reporters.
Lord was to hold a news conference on Thursday.
On Wednesday, he heard not only the views of the democrats but also politicians who oppose some of Britain's latest moves.
Before meeting Lord, the chairman of the Liberal Party, Allen Lee, said he would stress his opposition to the colonial government's decision last week to put forward a liberal new anti-subversion law without China's agreement.
"Mr Patten, knowing that the chief executive will be selected next week, gazetted last Friday a bill, without the agreement not only from the chief executive-designate, but also from the Chinese government," Lee said.
"I think this is totally irresponsible. He is playing politics, and he doesn't deserve to be the governor of Hong Kong," he said.
