Britain entered new talks with China on Hong Kong's future on Wednesday, admitting it could give no consular protection to Hong Kong people holding special British passports after the Chinese flag is hoisted in 1997.
Senior diplomats met to argue over handover details against a backdrop of disputes over a subversion law drafted by Britain and Chinese troop deployments in the British colony.
The agenda for the three-day meeting of the Joint Liaison Group (JLG) was confidential and it was not clear what, if any, agreements would be produced from the latest bargaining round.
But British chief negotiator Hugh Davies said a great effort was needed to surmount a raft of problems before the capitalist territory of 6.3 million people is handed over in 209 days.
"The subjects that we all know about...are questions such as continuity of law in Hong Kong, questions to do with right of abode, questions to to do with the international network of agreements that Hong Kong already has and which will be agreed to continue beyond 1997," Davies said.
His Chinese counterpart Zhao Jihua served notice that China, infuriated by the colonial government's liberal anti-subversion law last week, would not brook any more major unilateral changes in Hong Kong's legal set-up by Britain before 1997.
"During the period of the final days, we do not wish to see new troubles or new obstacles, because the remaining issues are more than enough to deal with," Zhao said.
"But we are still very confident, so long as the two sides sincerely cooperate with each other...we will solve all issues which are related to the transfer of Hong Kong in a timely and successful manner," Zhao said.
Hong Kong is to become an autonomous region of China at midnight next June 30, ending over 150 years of British colonial rule, under a treaty in which Beijing has vowed to let it keep its freewheeling capitalist system for 50 years.
In the latest of many twists in the transition, Britain's Senior Trade Commissioner, Francis Cornish, said on Tuesday London could not give consular protection to the more than 135,000 Hong Kong people holding special British passports.
Britain in 1990 granted 50,000 heads of households in Hong Kong the right to a full British passport in a concession to widespread demands for passports for all residents following Beijing's 1989 crackdown on pro-democracy demonstrators.
Cornish said China regarded these people as holders of dual citizenship and would not recognise British consular protection for them on Chinese soil.
"The Chinese have made it very clear that they regard holders of British Nationality Selection Scheme passports, when in Hong Kong and when in China, as Chinese citizens," he said.
British officials have also warned there could be a stampede home in June by Hong Kong people with domiciles abroad if China insists on them being present in person on handover day in order to keep their Hong Kong right of abode.
Britain's liberal bill on subversion, designed to exclude China-style jailings of dissidents, goes to the Hong Kong legislature later on Wednesday, and its fate is unpredictable.
China condemned the move last week and said such a law was the sole prerogative of the post-handover government to enact.
Earlier this week, British experts said they had failed to reach agreement with China in the JLG on Beijing's demand to send an advance party of People's Liberation Army (PLA) troops to Hong Kong before the handover.
The quarrel appears to be over the size of the unit, diplomats say.
Hong Kong people have bitter memories of the PLA's bloody crackdown on pro-democracy students in Beijing in 1989.
