The Hong Kong government was in a flap on Thursday after a bombshell admission that Britain could not protect Hong Kong holders of British passports after China takes over the colony next July.
Governor Chris Patten called an urgent meeting of the Legislative Council for later on Thursday to make a statement on the controversy, which arose after a British envoy said London could provide no consular protection for the passport holders.
Patten's spokesman said the issue had sparked "considerable public interest and a good deal of misunderstanding" as well as demands by legislators to meet him.
Patten would answer their questions at the extraordinary sitting of Legco on Thursday evening.
The uproar is the latest jolt in Hong Kong's often bumpy transition back to Chinese rule 208 days from now, when 150 years of colonial rule will end and the territory will become an autonomous region of China.
Britain's Senior Trade Commissioner, Francis Cornish, said on Tuesday that London could not protect the more than 135,000 Hong Kong people granted full British passports with right of abode in Britain under a special selection scheme in 1990.
In a concession to widespread demands for full British citizenship after Beijing's 1989 Tiananmen Square crackdown, London offered passports to 50,000 Hong Kong households, a privileged fraction of Hong Kong's 6.3 million people.
Cornish said China regarded these people as holders of dual citizenship and would not recognise British consular protection for them on Chinese soil, on the mainland or in Hong Kong.
Cornish's remarks were denounced by local politicians as a sell-out. In the corridors of the Hong Kong government even the most senior officials were privately criticising Britain for what they saw as a concession to China, one source said.
On Wednesday, London and the Hong Kong government rushed to assure affected passport holders that anyone claiming sole British nationality would receive consular protection until it was proven they held dual citizenship.
But a British statement made clear Britain could not give full consular protection for people holding dual Chinese nationality once Hong Kong becomes part of China again.
British officials said the passports issued to these people were indistinguishable from any other full British passport, but many in Hong Kong are concerned that Britain may have learned that China had obtained the names of the passport hodlers.
"The only way to know for sure if one of these passports was issued under the special scheme would be if you had the names," a senior government source said.
The transition to Chinese rule has been dogged by disputes since the 1989 Beijing crackdown. China reacted furiously to the special passport scheme, and again when Patten introduced reforms expanding democracy in 1992.
China was infuriated last week when Britain unveiled a liberal anti-subversion bill that would set legal markers against China-style jailings of dissidents in Hong Kong.
British and Chinese senior negotiators are in the midst of a three-day bargaining session on handover details and have signalled they expect to announce accords on several issues on Friday, although the agenda has so far remained confidential.
Hong Kong is supposed to be autonomous and keep its capitalist system intact for another 50 years, but a human rights group said on Wednesday China's crackdown on dissent bode badly for the territory and its autonomy prospects were slim.
"The rule of law and human rights picture is bleak," said Human Rights Monitor director Law Yuk-kai on the launch of an annual human rights report.
