Just months ago, shipping magnate Tung Chee-hwa was a retiring man who avoided the limelight, kept his political views secret, and seemed to steer an even keel between his loyalties to China and Britain.
But in a short time, he has emerged as the hot favourite to become Hong Kong's first post-colonial leader and evolved into a tough-talking conservative, loudly singing China's tune on key political issues, under the bright spotlight of the media.
The 59-year-old tycoon with hallmark spiky grey hair has been swapping his pinstripe suits for jeans and sportswear to traipse around local communities to show he not only walks among kings but also has the common touch.
Tung, 59, saw his fortunes almost dashed in the 1980s when the family company met ill winds, but Beijing helped bail him out with a syndicated loan, and now he is poised to be their man in Hong Kong.
On Wednesday, China's carefully screened Selection Committee will choose the chief executive to run Hong Kong after Britain hands its last important colony back to Beijing in mid-1997.
Tung is streets ahead of his rivals, having run away with 206 of the 400 votes in the first round of balloting.
Behind him are retired chief judge Yang Ti Liang, who scored 82, and businessman Peter Woo, who clocked up 54.
A poll last week for the first time made Tung the public's favourite -- 47 percent support versus Yang's 29 -- although the masses are excluded from voting for their future leader.
There is hardly a voice that does not pronounce Tung the predetermined winner. A pointed handshake from President Jiang Zemin in Beijing last January anointed Tung, most people think.
Since he declared his candidacy two months ago Tung has said he would legalise the Communist party, condemned the Democratic Party -- Hong Kong's largest -- for being anti-China, and warned foreign countries not to use Hong Kong to subvert China.
He also said anybody advocating independence for Taiwan or Tibet could not stay.
He has accused colonial Governor Chris Patten of trying to split Hong Kong, called for pro-China patriotism in the schools, and unveiled administrative polices stressing executive-led rule and a slower route to democracy.
Last week Tung rounded on those who use the term "pro-China" as a dirty word. "We have to turn pro-China into a very positive definition. It is a good thing to love our country," he said.
"I find him more colonial than the colonial government," complained Democratic Party legislator Tsang Kin-shing.
Tung has vowed to give free rein to Hong Kong's capitalist economy and business development. But he has also promised to boost the role of provident funds, guarantee welfare for the poor, and make cheap housing available.
While some fret over his conservatism, most who know him both at home and abroad hail Tung's good character. He has a reputation for modesty, wisdom and caution.
"He is a man, in my view, of great integrity, a strong individual, independent-minded, surely and sincerely promoting the welfare of the people of Hong Kong," said U.S. Assistant Secretary of State Winston Lord, a friend of Tung's.
But Lord noted he had failed to sway Tung to reject China's plan to scrap Hong Kong's elected Legislative Council with a provisional legislature next July 1. Britain has condemned the plan as a "black day for democracy" in the territory.
Tung has been a senior member of a Preparatory Committee of pro-Beijing Hong Kong notables and mainland China officials crafting the power structures to replace British colonial rule.
He was lauded as an impartial and honest counsellor by Patten when Tung left Patten's advisory cabinet in June.
He resigned in October as head of his firm, Orient Overseas (International) Ltd, to make his leadership bid.
Tung took the helm of Orient after his father died in 1979. He has publicly acknowledged China had helped bail out the firm 11 years ago by backing a US$120 million fund led by tycoon Henry Fok, a kingmaker in today's leadership contest.
Tung is believed to be liked in Britain and by many business leaders who hope he will form a "dream team" with incumbent Chief Secretary Anson Chan -- Hong Kong's top civil servant.
Born in Shanghai in 1937, Tung was educated at Liverpool University in Britain.
