Hong Kong democracy activists staged a noisy protest on Monday after 134 politicians applied to join a Beijing-controlled assembly to replace the colony's elected legislature in mid-1997.
The rush to join the provisional legislature may cripple the colonial legislature in the twilight of British rule, political analysts said.
As a registration deadline expired on Monday, organisers said 134 people had applied, among them at least 33 members of the present elected Legislative Council (Legco).
Hong Kong reverts to China at midnight next June 30, and Beijing is steaming ahead -- in the face of British objections -- with a plan to replace the elected Legco on handover day with a provisional assembly, to be selected on December 21.
The territory of 6.3 million people now face the prospect of two legislatures during the final six months of British rule -- one elected, legal and active, and one a "selected", shadow chamber preparing post-1997 laws.
The number of seats on Legco and the new body is the same -- 60. Among 33 incumbent lawmakers who have applied are Legco speaker Andrew Wong, whose bid startled the political community last weekend and sparked fears that Legco could disintegrate.
Banner-waving pro-democracy activists on Monday caused chaos in the lobby of the building where registration took place, burning documents and scuffling with security men. "Phoney election", "dictatorship in disguise", protesters shouted.
"Cracks which have already emerged within the Legislative Council over the bid by some members for a seat on the provisional legislature will widen in the next six months," said political commentator Chris Yeung.
"When you have two bodies from which laws emanate at the same time, there's going to be some confusion and dispute," said analyst Michael DeGolyer of Hong Kong's Baptist University.
Seat seekers for the new chamber include at least 11 former lawmakers and 22 former election contestants defeated in 1995 elections won by pro-democracy groups.
Those who lost 1995 elections include prominent pro-Beijing politicians such as Tsang Yok-sing, Peggy Lam and Elsie Tu.
Applicants include at least 47 newcomers to legislative contests, many of whom are members of the hand-picked 150-member Preparatory Committee crafting the post-1997 Hong Kong power structures on behalf of China's communist rulers.
Other newcomers are members of the 400-strong Selection Committee. This is the China-backed panel that will chose the first post-colonial leader on Wednesday, with the winner forecast to be conservative-minded shipping tycoon Tung Chee-hwa. The committee will also be responsible for selecting the provisional legislative body on December 21.
Poll results issued on Monday by the independent daily Ming Pao showed Hong Kong people split over the body's legitimacy.
The poll showed 32 percent supporting it, 30 percent against, and 38 percent voicing no opinion.
Britain has condemned China's plan as reprehensible and unnecessary and has ruled out all cooperation with the body.
The Democratic Party, the largest in the Legco with 19 seats, is absent from all China-controlled transition bodies.
It has boycotted the selection process, branding the provisional legislature as undemocratic and illegal, and has vowed to challenge its legitimacy in court.
The threat has forced Beijing to consider locating the new legislature in mainland China until the handover.
