More than 100 politicians, including half of today's lawmakers, have sought seats on a controversial Beijing-controlled legislature in a move that may cripple Hong Kong's parliament in the twilight of British rule.
Before a registration deadline on Monday, 112 people had applied to join the "provisional legislature", among them 33 members of the present elected Legislative Council (Legco).
Hong Kong reverts to China at midnight next June 30, and Beijing is pressing ahead -- despite British objections -- on setting up a provisional interim legislature to replace the elected Legco at the handover.
The provisional legislature will be selected on December 21.
The territory of 6.3 million people now faces a bizarre prospect of having two legislatures for the final six months of British rule -- one elected, legal and active, and a shadow "selected" chamber vulnerable to courtroom battles.
The number of seats on Legco and the new body is the same -- 60. An official of the China-controlled committee supervising the three-week registration process said 217 people had requested application forms, so there could be more contenders at the last minute.
Among 33 incumbent lawmakers who have applied are Legco speaker Andrew Wong, whose bid startled the political community last weekend and sparked fears that Legco could disintegrate.
"Cracks which have already emerged within the Legislative Council over the bid by some members for a seat on the provisional legislature will widen in the next six months," said political commentator Chris Yeung.
"When you have two bodies from which laws emanate at the same time, there's going to be some confusion and dispute," said analyst Michael DeGolyer of Hong Kong's Baptist University.
Those wanting a seat in the new chamber also include 11 ex-lawmakers and 22 former election contestants defeated in 1995 elections in which pro-democracy groups led by the Democratic Party fared strongly.
The 1995 losers applying for a seat include prominent pro-Beijing politicians such as Tsang Yok-sing, Peggy Lam and Elsie Tu.
Applicants also include 47 newcomers to legislative contests, many of whom are members of the hand-picked 150-member Preparatory Committee crafting the post-1997 Hong Kong power structures on behalf of China's communist rulers.
Other newcomers are members of the 400-strong Selection Committee. This is the China-backed panel that will chose the first post-colonial leader on Wednesday, with the winner forecast to be conservative-minded shipping tycoon Tung Chee-hwa. The committee will also be responsible for selecting the provisional legislative body on December 21.
An opinion poll published on Monday by the independent daily Ming Pao showed Hong Kong people split over the legitimacy of the provisional legislature.
The poll showed 32 percent supporting the body, 30 percent against, and 38 percent voicing no opinion. A sample of 983 respondents were surveyed by telephone for the poll.
The Democratic Party, the largest in the Legco with 19 seats, are absent from all China-controlled transition bodies.
They have boycotted the selection process, branding the provisional legislature as undemocratic and illegal, and have vowed to challenge its legitimacy in the courts.
The threat has forced Beijing's representatives in Hong Kong to consider locating the interim legislature in mainland China in the transitional period.
Britain has condemned China's plan as reprehensible and unnecessary and has ruled out all cooperation with the body.
