Hong Kong has arrived at the brink of history, set to name its first Chinese leader after a century and a half of British colonial rule.
At a gathering to be held under the red flag of communist-ruled China, Hong Kong's rich and mighty will meet on Wednesday to pick the first post-colonial leader -- and the smart money is on shipping tycoon Tung Chee-hwa.
The vote by a 400-member Chinese-controlled Selection Committee, slammed by critics as a travesty of democracy, was viewed by most in Hong Kong as a foregone conclusion.
A survey by Hong Kong University showed 82.2 percent expected Tung to win, while 43.4 percent of respondents would back him if they had the chance to vote. His nearest rival, Ti Liang Yang, would get 27.9 percent of popular support.
Sovereignty over the territory of 6.3 million people, one of Asia's economic wonders and Britain's last major colony, reverts to China at midnight next June 30 -- 203 days from now.
The winner of Wednesday's vote by the committee will become the chief executive-designate of the Special Administrative Region of China, as Hong Kong will be called from next July 1.
On the eve of the vote a small band of pro-democracy protesters camped overnight outside the conference centre.
Some politicians and diplomats fretted about China-style repression. "The people of Hong Kong cannot trust him (Tung) to protect our rights...I cannot see how he is in a position to say no to Beijing on any important issue," said legislator Martin Lee.
"Unless there is a complete change in the attitude of these candidates the outlook for human rights in Hong Kong is very bad," said Paul Harris, head of Hong Kong Human Rights Monitor.
But the markets, a barometer of Hong Kong's fortunes, trumpeted bullish optimism. Hong Kong stocks rebounded from recent losses to end 198 points up, the index of China-linked H-shares soared to nine-month highs in the largest one-day gain in history, and forecasters predicted a 1997 property boom.
Publicly espousing "consensus" rather than confrontation with China, and collective duties over individual rights, and blessed by a public handshake from President Jiang Zemin in January, 59-year-old Shanghai-born Tung grabbed 206 votes in the first round of voting last month by the committee.
He only needs 201 to win the clincher on Wednesday. Some Hong Kong newspapers were already putting the finishing touches on Tuesday to a slew of Tung-the-victor profiles for Wednesday.
If he wins, he will be greeted by a no-confidence debate presented by lawmaker Emily Lau, one of China's loudest critics, in Hong Kong's Legislative Council (Legco).
Governor Chris Patten has vowed support for the future leader, whoever he is, in the twilight of British rule.
But Tung has not responded to the plege. He has said he will consult Hong Kong's respected civil service on how best to run the territory and ensure a smooth transition.
"Nobody wants the present administration to be turned into a lame duck," Tung said on Monday.
If he wins, Tung will spend the next six months assembling a cabinet of advisers to guide policy. His team is expected to be highly pro-business.
He will also lay the groundwork for a provisional legislature, soon to be picked by the same Selection Committee, to take over from the present elected Legco next July 1.
