The head of Hong Kong's main pro-democracy group said on Tuesday that the man likely to be the first post-colonial leader after British rule is a pro-China yes-man, and described preparations for the sovereignty change as a disaster.
Martin Lee, head of the Democratic Party, the largest in Hong Kong's legislature, told Reuters in an interview that shipping tycoon Tung Chee-hwa was indebted to Beijing for a company bail-out years ago and was unlikely to defend democracy.
"The Hong Kong people want and need a defender of the Hong Kong system. What we are getting, it seems, is somebody who is going to be a spokesman of China. That is very unfortunate.
"The people of Hong Kong cannot trust him to protect our rights, not because he is a bad man, he is a nice guy, but I cannot see how he is in a position to say no to Beijing on any important issue," he said.
Tung, 59, is the favourite to win when a 400-member selection committee meets on Wednesday to pick the chief executive of the special administrative region (SAR), as Hong Kong will be called after China takes over next July 1.
Britain is handing the colony back to Beijing under a treaty called the Joint Declaration, which promises to keep Hong Kong's freewheeling capitalist system intact for a further 50 years.
Lee said there was never any doubt Tung would win, echoing a widely held view that the future leader was picked in Beijing.
The lawyer and legislator said Tung owed China a big debt for a Chinese-sponsored financial bailout of his family firm, the Oriental Overseas group, in the 1980s.
"How can he say no to Beijing? Beijing will say 'wait a minute, who bailed you out in the early 1980s and who put you in this position?" Lee said.
But his party would try to work with Tung if he won. "We are quite prepared to cooperate with the chief executive irrespective of the personality involved...we cannot carry on as a political party without dialogue with the chief executive."
Lee denied accusations by Tung that the Democratic Party was anti-China. "That's clearly wrong. We have always supported the return of sovereignty over Hong Kong by the British to the Chinese government on July 1.
"We only criticise China whenever we believe the Joint Declaration has been broken by China...in these circumstances we have a duty to object and to oppose.
"It is far too simplistic and wrong for Mr Tung to say we are anti-China. We are not. China is our country. I have yet to see him side with Hong Kong on any key issue, like the provisional legislature," Lee said.
Britain and the Hong Kong democrats have criticised China's plan to scrap the elected Legislative Council and install a provisional legislature next July as an attempt to kill off democracy.
"It's going to be the most disastrous thing. Once you allow China to set up an effectively appointed legislature when under the Joint Declaration we were promised an elected legislature, you are actually accepting that China can break the Joint Declaration at will. So what other provision is safe?" Lee said.
He said Beijing had made clear the new legislature would pass repressive laws to control the freedom of the press and the freedom of assembly. "There can be little doubt that the rule of law as we know it will not be there any more. Freedoms can no longer be protected."
Lee said 134 candidates nominated for the provisional legislature this week would all take orders from Beijing.
"You would not find even five of them who could be called democrats, by any stretch of the imagination."
