On the eve of an historic gathering of the elite assembled by China to pick Hong Kong's future leader, the smart money was on Tung Chee-hwa.
Most observers viewed it as a foregone conclusion that the shipping tycoon would emerge the winner after the 400-strong Selection Committee of Hong Kong business titans and pro-China politicians meets on Wednesday to choose the territory's post-colonial chief executive.
Blessed by a personal public handshake from Chinese President Jiang Zemin last January, Tung ran off with 206 votes in the first round of voting last month by the committee, which was chosen under Beijing's close supervision.
Sovereignty over the territory of 6.3 million people, one of Asia's economic wonders and Britain's last major colony, reverts to China at midnight next June 30 -- 203 days from now.
A poll by Hong Kong's Lingnan College showed on Tuesday that 56 percent believed the winner has probably been picked in advance. Only 18 percent believe there will be a real contest.
"I don't think there was ever any doubt that it would be Mr Tung. I've been calling this selection committee the Tung Chee-hwa selection committee," said Martin Lee, head of the Democratic Party, the largest in Hong Kong's legislature.
Lee, whose party is boycotting the selection process, said Tung could not be counted on to preserve Hong Kong's freedoms, human rights and its current moves towards greater democracy.
"The people of Hong Kong cannot trust him to protect our rights, not because he is a bad man, he is a nice guy, but I cannot see how he is in a position to say no to Beijing on any important issue," Lee said.
Some Hong Kong newspapers were already putting the finishing touches on Tuesday to a slew of Tung-the-victor profiles for publication on Wednesday, an industry source said.
If he wins on Wednesday, Tung will be greeted soon by a no-confidence debate presented by lawmaker Emily Lau, one of China's loudest critics.
Colonial Governor Chris Patten has promised his support for the chief executive-designate, whoever it turns out to be, in the twilight months of British rule.
Tung has not responded to the pledge but has said he will engage Hong Kong's respected civil service in dialogue on how best to run the territory and ensure a smooth transition.
"Nobody wants the present administration to be turned into a lame duck," Tung said on Monday.
Two rival candidates -- former Chief Justice Ti Liang Yang and entrepreneur Peter Woo -- are both ranked as outsiders.
An opinion poll by Hong Kong University last week gave Tung 46.7 percent, Yang 28.8 percent and Woo 5.2 percent public backing.
But Tung only began to gain public support in the past month, after Patten's chief civil servant Anson Chan declared she would not run for the job. Tung has never matched the 60 percent-plus popularity ratings which Chan enjoyed.
Assuming he wins, the 59-year-old tycoon will spend the next six months assembling a cabinet of advisers to guide policy after Hong Kong becomes an autonomous Special Administrative Region of China. His team is expected to be highly pro-business, but he has also promised a role for grassoots bodies.
He will also lay the groundwork for a provisional legislature, soon to be picked by the same Selection Committee, to take over from the present elected Legco next July 1.
The leader-in-waiting will face many challenges before and after the handover, with Britain and China locked in disputes on issues ranging from passports, nationality and troop deployments to an anti-subversion law and the disbanding of Legco.
