Just months ago, shipping magnate Tung Chee-hwa was a retiring man who avoided the limelight, kept his political views secret, and seemed to strike a balance between his loyalties to China and Britain.
But he has emerged as Hong Kong's first post-colonial leader and evolved into a conservative, Chinese patriot, loudly singing China's tune on key political issues under the bright spotlight of the media.
A 400-member Selection Committee controlled by China on Wednesday picked Tung as chief executive to govern Hong Kong when it becomes an autonomous region of China in mid-1997.
On the campaign trail, the 59-year-old tycoon with hallmark spiky grey hair had been swapping his pinstripe suits for jeans and sportswear to traipse around local communities to show he not only walks among kings but also has the common touch.
Tung saw his fortunes almost dashed in the 1980s when the family firm met ill winds, but Beijing helped bail him out with a syndicated loan. Now he is their man in Hong Kong.
Tung grabbed a resounding 320 of the committee's 400 votes.
Eve-of-vote polls also showed Tung to be the public's favourite -- 47 percent support versus his nearest rival Yang Ti Liang's 29 percent. The masses, however, had no vote.
Many saw Tung's victory as preordained. A pointed handshake from President Jiang Zemin in Beijing last January anointed him, most people think.
During his campaign, Tung said he would legalise the Communist Party. He condemned the Democratic Party -- Hong Kong's largest -- for being anti-China, and warned foreign countries not to use Hong Kong to subvert China.
He also said anybody advocating independence for Taiwan or Tibet could not stay in Hong Kong.
He has accused colonial Governor Chris Patten of trying to split Hong Kong, called for pro-China patriotism in schools, and unveiled administrative policies stressing executive-led rule and a slower route to democracy.
Tung rounded on those who use the term "pro-China" as a dirty word.
"We have to turn pro-China into a very positive definition. It is a good thing to love our country," he said.
Complained Democratic Party legislator Tsang Kin-shing: "I find him more colonial than the colonial government."
Tung has vowed to give free rein to Hong Kong's capitalist economy and business development. But he has also promised not to ignore the need for social welfare.
While some fret over his conservatism, most who know him both at home and abroad hail Tung's good character. He has a reputation for modesty, wisdom and caution.
"He is a man, in my view, of great integrity, a strong individual, independent-minded, surely and sincerely promoting the welfare of the people of Hong Kong," said U.S. Assistant Secretary of State Winston Lord, a friend of Tung's.
But Lord noted he had failed to sway Tung to reject China's plan to scrap Hong Kong's elected Legislative Council with a provisional legislature next July 1. Britain has condemned the plan as a "black day for democracy" in the territory.
Tung has been a senior member of the Preparatory Committee of pro-Beijing, Hong Kong notables and mainland China officials crafting the power structures to replace British colonial rule.
He was lauded as an impartial and honest counsellor by Patten when he left the governor's advisory cabinet in June.
He resigned in October as head of his company, Orient Overseas (International) Ltd, to make his leadership bid.
Tung took the helm of Orient after his father died in 1979. He has publicly acknowledged that China helped bail out the company 11 years ago by backing a US$120 million fund led by tycoon Henry Fok, a kingmaker in the leadership contest.
Born in Shanghai in 1937, Tung was educated at Liverpool University in Britain.
