He once sailed his shipping empire through rough waters, steered an even course between China and Britain for years, but navigating Hong Kong into Chinese rule in 1997 will be the challenge of his lifetime.
Shipping magnate Tung Chee-hwa, chosen as Hong Kong's first Chinese leader on Wednesday after more than 150 years of British colonial rule, will take the helm on July 1.
"He will be charting the course for Hong Kong as it enters a new era. And he will be at the helm of what is at once an economic powerhouse and a dynamic, sophisticated metropolis," Governor Chris Patten, Britain's last colonial chief, said in a statement congratulating Tung on his victory.
It is a mission that has no precedent.
The territory that Tung governs will be the first British colony to have matured into a world trading economy and then handed back to a communist-ruled motherland.
China has promised the territory of 6.3 million people a great degree of autonomy and at least 50 more years of untrammeled capitalism but vowed to curb the pace of democratic reform.
The 59-year-old tycoon saw his fortunes almost dashed in the 1980s when the family firm met ill winds, but Beijing helped bail him out with a syndicated loan, and his firm regained its strength.
In his new role, Tung will have to tack between pro-democracy politicians who branded his triumph the death of democracy, the departing colonial British with their sense of lost empire, and a proud Beijing Communist leadership keen to set the stamp "This is China" on the map of Hong Kong forever.
The vocal pro-democracy lobby plans to challenge his authority with a no-confidence vote in the current legislature.
"What Hong Kong needs most is a champion for Hong Kong people as we face the unprecedented challenges of the handover -- not a spokesman for China," said Democratic Party leader Martin Lee.
Some analysts predicted Hong Kong's own version of China's "red princelings" -- sons and daughters of senior Communist Party officials -- would move to centre stage from now.
Members of families closely tied to the Beijing government since the 1950s are favourites for the 60 seats in the new legislature or roles in Tung's inner advisory cabinet.
The new elite will look to people such as legislator Leung Chun-ying, a policeman's son who has emerged as Beijing's trusted lieutenant in the transition process.
The princelings also include figures such as Timothy Fok, eldest son of Beijing's most trusted man in Hong Kong, tycoon Henry Fok, a kingmaker in the contest that Tung won.
Tung must now swiftly lay down a gameplan for the next six months with Beijing, political analysts said.
He must also work closely with the politicians and business titans likely to be brought into the post-1997 provisional legislature and advisory cabinet known as the Executive Council.
"He will start out with a unity of support behind him at least from the more moderate and pro-China in Hong Kong," said political analyst Michael DeGolyer of the Baptist University.
"I think he's going to have to move rather rapidly to talk to the people in Beijing. He is going to have to move rather rapidly to meet with Provisional Legco (Legislative Council) members," DeGolyer said.
Tung's first bite at his realm will come on Thursday when the China-controlled Hong Kong Preparatory Committee crafting 1997 power structures meets over the border in Shenzhen city.
Very soon, Tung will also have to talk to Hong Kong's popular top civil servant, Chief Secretary Anson Chan.
Tung has said he would like to keep Chan as chief secretary but her past defence of Patten's democratic reforms may have dented her credibility and spoiled her chances of staying on.
Tung is keen not to rock the boat and has said he aims to keep as much of the civil service intact as possible. "Nobody wants the present administration to be turned into a lame duck," Tung said before the vote.
