Hong Kong's chief executive designate Tung Chee-hwa, fresh from an overwhelming leadership victory, launched a charm offensive on Thursday aimed at winning public confidence in a smooth transition to China.
At a meeting in this Chinese frontier city, the 59-year-old Shanghai-born former shipping magnate was also endorsed as Hong Kong's future leader by the 150-member China-controlled Preparatory Committee, which is crafting the territory's future political institutions.
A beaming, animated Tung appeared at a Shenzhen news conference, vowing to make himself regularly available to the press, and promising to aim for friendly cooperative relations with Hong Kong's Democratic Party and the outgoing colonial administration.
"Have you eaten?" was his first remark as he entered a gathering of 100 Hong Kong journalists. He fielded his questions skillfully, shifting effortlessly between three languages -- Mandarin, Cantonese and English.
Tung quipped and charmed with great self-confidence and a charismatic style that would be the envy of many Chinese leaders in Beijing, not known for their skillful handling of the media.
He declared he would go on the offensive to persuade Hong Kong's 6.3 million people to trust a controversial 60-member provisional legislature which China plans to install in place of the present elected Legislative Council (Legco) when Britain hands back the colony to Beijing next July 1.
"I think you'll find the provisional legislature will have good credibility," the businessman turned politician said.
"The acceptability of the provisional legislature is gaining ground every day. I'm confident we'll find 60 people with credibility among the people of Hong Kong."
Thursday's Preparatory Committee meeting in the boomtown of Shenzhen was working on a package of procedures for selecting the legislature on December 21, the next milestone in Hong Kong's march to Chinese rule.
Hong Kong's Democratic Party has condemned the move as an attempt to snuff out the territory's embryonic democracy and vowed to challenge the legislature's legality in the courts, forcing China to consider locating the body on the mainland rather than in Hong Kong.
But Tung said he would also like to charm the Democrats by sitting down with them and "peacefully" discussing the transition problems.
Tung said he hoped to cooperate with departing governor Chris Patten and the British colonial administration. He recognised there were many difficulties but said: "Let's do what is best for Hong Kong."
He also said that Hong Kong would continue its gradual shift towards greater democracy but only at the slower pace laid down in the territory's post-1997 constitution, the Basic Law.
"We will of course move forward on the course of democracy in accordance with the Basic Law," he said. "The process has already begun. It's quite clearly defined in the Basic Law."
Tung said he had no news yet on who he planned to bring into his kitchen cabinet, the Executive Council, or whether Hong Kong's current chief civil servant Anson Chan would stay on.
"I hope she will stay, I hope she will be my deputy," he said, repeating his desire for a through-train civil service and smooth transition.
Tung also said he would go to Beijing for investiture as the Chief Executive-designate of Hong Kong but no date had been set.
