China and Britain moved closer on Friday to removing some obstacles to Hong Kong's smooth transfer to Chinese sovereignty next year, but fresh controversies raised new potential hurdles.
Agreements took shape on issues of handover ceremonies and budgets but quarrels brewed over China's moves to appoint new political leaders for Hong Kong.
Hong Kong government radio quoted diplomats saying London and Beijing were closing in on an agreement on a ceremony to mark Hong Kong's handover to China next June 30/July 1 and that the deal might be announced next month.
The sources signalled progress in informal talks and that a basic accord could be forged before foreign ministers of the two nations meet at the United Nations General Assembly in New York next month, the government-run radio said.
Differences over handover ceremonies have posed a stumbling block in negotiations on the sovereignty transfer, especially the question of what role Governor Chris Patten will play.
At the same time concrete progress was announced in talks on Hong Kong's next budget, which will straddle the handover date.
British and Chinese negotiators agreed on ways to allocate resources for the 1997/98 budget, Chinese senior official Chen Zuo'er told reporters after the latest talks.
Chen announced agreement on spending guidelines, maximum spending limits and procedures for dealing with new requests for money from the budget. Hong Kong Treasury Secretary K.C. Kwong was upbeat about the breakthrough.
"We have in the past few days had very positive pragmatic discussions on the preparation of the 1997-98 Budget," he said.
"We have for all practical purposes completed the preparatory stage of the resource allocation exercise," he said.
"Our next step will be to consider the bids for new resources from branches and departments."
But prospects of a smooth handover on the political front appear less bright. A Beijing official was quoted as saying a list of names of people being nominated by the public to sit on a caucus that will pick the first post-colonial legislature and governor, the chief executive, would not be made public.
The official was quoted by the South China Morning Post as saying some nominees might not want their names to be publicised and that only the nominees would have the right to see the list.
"This whole fiasco is too much. The whole thing is such a sham," pro-democracy legislator Emily Lau told Reuters.
"Perhaps they feel some important people will be embarrassed if they are not picked. The whole process lacks transparency and accountability and credibility."
The Wen Wei Po newspaper, flagship of Beijing's propaganda machine in Hong Kong, attacked Britain on Friday for trying to amend Hong Kong's laws in order to preserve London's influence after 1997.
The salvo came just a day after the paper criticised Britain's chief handover negotiator, Hugh Davies, accusing him of touting Britain's own favourite for post-1997 leader.
Davies' office dismissed the claim as ludicrous but Chinese spokesman Zhang Junsheng told reporters: "The British side should not meddle, and has no right to poke its nose in. This is entirely a matter for China."
