Two hundred days before its historic handover to China, Hong Kong has adopted a charismatic shipping tycoon as helmsman to lead it into the 21st century.
But the British colony of 6.3 million people is waiting to see if chief executive-designate Tung Chee-hwa can form a "dream team" with the territory's most popular public figure, "iron lady" Anson Chan, head of the present colonial Civil Service.
The former tycoon, who resigned from his shipping empire to become Hong Kong's first post-colonial leader, takes over from British Governor Chris Patten at midnight next June 30, when a century and a half of colonial rule comes to an end.
"If Tung can keep Anson in her job, we will have a dream team leadership that both Britain and the Hong Kong community will be happy with," a senior official said.
Tung, 59, selected by a Beijing-vetted electoral college to run the future Hong Kong Special Administrative Region of China, named Chan on Thursday as favourite to be his deputy, saying he wanted her to stay on as head of the 180,000-member civil service.
"I have said I hope she can remain at her post. She, too, has indicated she is willing to do so. I hope she can be my chief secretary," Tung said in the Chinese city of Shenzhen.
"I would like to see a smooth transition. I hope most of the senior officials can remain in office," he said.
Chan, 56, has signalled her interest in working for Tung but restated her fervent belief in libertarian values.
She praised Tung for urging Hong Kong to forget political squabbles and "find common ground to build Hong Kong together".
But she cautioned that the freedoms and plurality of views that made Hong Kong one of the world's economic marvels must be preserved, and said pragmatism and flexibility were vital to it.
"Its very success has been founded on tolerance of different viewpoints," she told the college gathering. "I believe that the law was made for man, not man for the law, that government is the servant of the people, not their master."
Of a similar age, Tung and Chan have much in common and have always described their relationship as friendly.
Both their families moved from Shanghai to Hong Kong as the Communists overran China, defeating the Nationalists in a long civil war that ended in 1949.
The contest for Hong Kong's handover leadership has been dominated by the Shanghai connection. The two candidates who lost to Tung -- former Chief Justice Yang Ti Liang and entrepreneur Peter Woo -- were also Shanghai-born.
Chan herself had earlier been touted as a leadership candidate, having emerged in the polls this year as Hong Kong's most popular political personality with more than 60 percent of public support. But she decided not to run against Tung.
The Shanghainese form one the greatest networks within Hong Kong. Tens of thousands of Shanghai people fled the Communist regime and relocated their businesses in Hong Kong after 1949.
The current leadership in China is also heavily dominated by the so-called "Shanghai faction" led by President Jiang Zemin, who has been actively promoting officials from his home area.
Tung, a conservative who was once bailed out by Chinese funds and who opposes conflict with Beijing, has evolved from a publicity-shy figure into a charismatic leader-in-waiting who can charm and quip his way through news conferences.
He shifts comfortably from one language to another -- English, Cantonese and Mandarin.
Chan is profoundly respected by civil servants for her no-nonsense, efficient administrative style, which has earned her a reputation for toughness -- tempered by a huge smile, kind heart and balanced political outlook.
"The question is whether it is too balanced. Beijing may reject her for defending democracy too much," the official said.
