Britain's Prince Andrew has arrived in Hong Kong to inspect his troops in one of the last royal visits to the territory before its return to Chinese rule in the middle of next year.
During the three-day visit the Duke of York will watch jungle training and border patrols by soldiers of the 1st battalion of the Staffordshire regiment, of which he is Colonel-In-Chief.
Prince Andrew made a low-key entry to Hong Kong on Monday night and was entertained at Government House by Governor Chris Patten and his wife Lavender, officials said.
"It was a quiet supper," said one official. "This is a low-key visit. He will spend most of his time with the One Staffords," an official said. "It's quite likely his last visit here before China takes over."
The prince, who fought in the 1982 Falklands War, will visit Hong Kong battle positions from World War Two, when the colony was occupied for four years by Japanese troops.
He will visit Hong Kong's military base on Stonecutters Island, the scene this year of many a tearful military farewell as the British steadily withdraw their armed forces ahead of 1997.
The garrison will be scaled down from almost 3,000 now to about 1,500 six weeks before the handover. All remaining troops are then to be pulled out by the time Britain hands over to China at midnight on June 30.
Andrew was to attend a cermony at which the colours of the Dragon Company of the Hong Kong Military Service Corps will be handed over to the Staffordshires, who will adopt the dragons as their nickname, a military officer said.
The dragons corps of Chinese servicemen, Britain's only Hong Kong Chinese army unit, lowered its ensign for the last time at a disbandment ceremony last Saturday.
The Staffordshires are one of two battalions that will be stationed in Hong Kong in the final months of British rule.
From July 1, China's People's Liberation Army will take over the garrison with a force of up to 10,000 troops, matching the British at their former peak of troop strength.
Andrew is expected on Wednesday to visit construction sites related to the territory's mammoth new airport now being built at Chek Lap Kok on the outlying Lantau Island, officials said.
He will see the huge Tsing Ma suspension bridge linking Lantau and the mainland part of Hong Kong with an expressway and railway corridor to the airport, they said.
Hong Kong is the last outpost in Asia of the formerly globe-girdling British Empire. The handover next year weighs heavily on the hearts of British patriots, colonials and fans of the royals who sadly regard the event as the sunset of British power and prestige.
Andrew's visit is likely to be one of the last by a member of the royal family before Queen Elizabeth's realm loses the bustling capitalist enclave of 6.3 million people to China.
Princess Anne is expected to visit for a ceremonial opening next month of Britain's Consulate-General building, which will be London's official mission in Hong Kong after the handover.
Although not official yet, it is an open secret that Britain wants heir-to-the-throne Prince Charles to preside over the last farewell on handover night and to sail away with Patten on the royal yacht Brittania after the furling of the Union Jack.
