Shipping magnate Tung Chee-hwa was to fly to Beijing on Tuesday to be anointed by China's communist leadership as Hong Kong's first Chinese leader when Britain pulls out in mid-1997.
Tung was to head for the Chinese capital in the afternoon after addressing Hong Kong's business community in his first major speech since he was selected as the territory's future chief executive last Wednesday.
In Beijing, he will have his first face-to-face meeting with China's President Jiang Zemin and Premier Li Peng since formally launching his bid for Hong Kong's leadership mantle two months ago.
It was Jiang who signalled in January this year that Tung was Beijing's favourite for the job when he singled out the tycoon for a warm, personal handshake at a reception in Beijing.
Britain is returning its last major colony to its former and future masters in Beijing at midnight next June 30, after a century and a half of colonial rule that turned it into one of Asia's economic marvels with a population of 6.3 million people.
One of Tung's first tasks in the twilight of British rule will be to cobble together an advisory cabinet called the Executive Council and to decide which senior mandarins to keep.
He has said he will start this task after his China visit, reinforcing speculation in Hong Kong that China will call the shots from behind the scenes on the make-up of the future government of the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region.
"If he waits before deciding on his team, there will be lingering doubts as to whether he was acting on instructions received from Beijing," the South China Morning Post said in its main editorial on Tuesday.
On Monday, the colonial government said it would set limits on how much it would help Tung to form a government-in-waiting before the transfer of sovereignty.
Constitutional Affairs Secretary Nicholas Ng told the Legislative Council that the government ruled out a mass exodus of senior officials to the government-in-waiting because it would undermine the stability and efficiency of the present administration.
The colonial administration is supposed to cooperate with the incoming government under the handover agreement.
But the transition has been fraught with disputes over issues ranging from human rights and democracy to infrastructure projects, darkening prospects for serious cooperation.
Many senior civil servants, including Chief Secretary Anson Chan, who is Governor Chris Patten's deputy, and Financial Secretary Donald Tsang, stayed away from a business dinner party attended by Tung on Monday night, though they had been invited.
Officials said Chan and Tsang had scheduling conflicts but political analysts said it might have been a sign that the administration's top two civil servants would not keep their jobs.
The 400-member, Beijing-controlled Selection Committee that selected Tung last week is now preparing for the next milestone in the march to Chinese rule -- the selection on Saturday of a 60-member, pro-China "provisional legislature" with which China plans to replace the existing, elected legislature on July 1.
Patten again condemned the new legislature in an interview with the French newspaper Liberation on Monday, saying he would never cooperate with it.
"This echo chamber has no place in the political or administrative life of Hong Kong," he said.
