The contest for power in Hong Kong heated up at the weekend as the pro-China lobby cast a top judge into the race as the candidate to lead the territory after sovereignty reverts from Britain to China in 1997.
Controversial Chief Justice Sir Ti Liang Yang re-emerged as a rival to existing favourites after influential pro-Beijing publisher Xu Shimin said he would nominate him and that the judge was keen to take up the challenge.
Hong Kong, the last significant outpost of the British empire, reverts to China on July 1, ending a century and a half of colonial rule.
China is setting up a 400-member panel called the Selection Committee, which will nominate the first post-colonial governor, to be known as the Chief Executive, and appoint a provisional legislature to replace the present elected Legislative Council.
Nominations in the month-long process to create the committee close in two weeks' time, and almost 20,000 nomination forms have been requested and issued.
China has ruled out a universal democratic vote by Hong Kong's people to pick their post-handover political leaders.
The committee is expected to pick the chief executive around November.
Yang's return to the contest comes as a surprise after he faded from the picture last year in a row about his remarks on human rights.
Lawyers and pro-democracy politicians attacked him last November after he said the Bill of Rights, which was introduced in Hong Kong by the colonial administration and which China plans to dilute next year, had sown chaos in the judiciary.
The 67-year-old China-born lawyer left his home to study law in London after the Communists took power. He later settled in Hong Kong, where he has worked for 30 years in the judiciary.
A poll last week showed the public's hot favourite for post-colonial leader is Anson Chan, the colony's Chief Secretary and deputy to British-appointed Governor Chris Patten. She scored a stunning 60.1 percent of respondents' support.
Runner-up in the poll was shipping magnate Tung Chee-hwa with 10.4 percent, and the leader of the biggest political party, the Democratic Party's Martin Lee, came third with 10 percent.
But China has kept Lee and his Democrats out of the handover stakes and he has scant chance of being nominated.
Chan is also unlikely to be accepted by the committee because she is closely identified with Britain. Last week a top Chinese official attacked Britain's chief diplomat in Hong Kong for touting London's favoured candidate -- presumed to be Chan.
The poll showed Yang would come into the picture if neither Chan nor Lee were candidates. In that case Yang would get 9.8 percent, but Tung would rise to 21.6 percent.
However, the Selection Commitee is what will count, not public opinion, and China has insisted the nomination list remain secret, arousing suspicions of foul play.
Xu said Yang was happy to be proposed by him and that the judge's independence was a strong factor.
"A judge has no business connections, and there are many against Mr Tung because of his business background," Xu said.
Tsang Yok-sing, a senior member of the panel overseeing the entire handover process for China, said Yang was "unbiased and neutral".
Political analyst Chris Yeung said the latest move showed Beijing seemed undecided who it wanted in charge in Hong Kong.
"Sir Ti Liang, a judge not known for his business links, might not be the perfect choice, but he might yet win out as a compromise figure," Yeung wrote in the South China Morning Post.
The chief justice was out of town on Sunday and unavailable to comment.
