Britain has suggested going to the World Court over China's plan to disband Hong Kong's elected legislature when Beijing takes back the territory next July.
The spectre of the two countries slugging it out in the International Court of Justice in the Hague raised the drama of Hong Kong's transition to Chinese rule to a new level after many months of bitter wrangling on handover arrangements.
British Foreign Secretary Malcolm Rifkind and Hong Kong Governor Chris Patten denounced China's plans on Friday and proposed letting the World Court rule on the dispute.
After more than 150 years of British rule, the capitalist territory of 6.3 million people falls back under the Chinese flag at midnight next June 30, with promises from Beijing's communist leadership that almost nothing will change.
At that moment, a Beijing-appointed legislature will take over from the elected Legislative Council (Legco), reversing democratic reforms introduced by Patten over the past four years.
"There is no justification for China to replace a legislature elected openly and fairly by more than one million Hong Kong people," Rifkind said in London.
"China should be prepared to trust Hong Kong people with the measure of democracy we have introduced."
He summoned Chinese ambassador Jiang Enzhu, the man tipped to be China's envoy in Hong Kong next July, to underline Britain's concern.
Separately, Patten said in a statement and in an interview with Reuters that the body planned by China would be a "rubber stamp" chamber that would simply echo Beijing.
The threat of World Court action came on the eve of a vote by 400 wealthy and influential Hong Kong people picked under China's supervision to elect the provisional legislature.
Pro-democracy groups staged scattered protests in Hong Kong and jeered committee members as they left for the Chinese frontier city of Shenzhen where Saturday's meeting takes place.
"The International Court of Justice will, I'm sure, be able to sort things out, and we'd be very happy to put our arguments to them," Patten told Reuters.
"Clearly this weekend is going to be a very disagreeable one," Patten said, adding that China might "trash an institution" but it could not "stamp out the spirit of democracy" in Hong Kong.
Protesters mounted small-scale demonstrations outside China's diplomatic mission in the colony and at the Hung Hom railway station where members of the Selection Committee were boarding trains for Shenzhen.
"It is totally unacceptable," said lawmaker Emily Lau, who joined in the protests. "There is no legal and constitutional basis for that body, and also the Chinese government is using that body to kick out people who they do not like."
Patten said that despite Britain's views on the legislature, he would meet Hong Kong's post-colonial leader-designate, 59-year-old shipping magnate Tung Chee-hwa, to explore ways to cooperate on building the post-handover administration.
The quarrel over the legislature set Tung and Patten on a collision course this week. Tung lashed back in a speech to the business community, saying Britain must "face the reality" and warned that if the legislature were challenged he would get China's parliament to pass a resolution making it legal.
Hong Kong's biggest pro-democracy group, the Democratic Party, is boycotting Saturday's selection process, which it brands as a plot to snuff out democracy and enact repressive laws.
"You won't find five of them who can be called democrats by any stretch of the imagination," Democratic Party leader Martin Lee told Reuters, commenting on the candidates.
