Hong Kong's Governor Chris Patten on Friday denounced a legislature that Beijing plans to impose on the territory as a "rubber stamp" and said Britain and China should fight it out in the World Court.
"The International Court of Justice will, I'm sure, be able to sort things out, and we'd be very happy to put our arguments to them," Patten told Reuters in an interview.
His remarks, on the eve of a gathering in China to create the legislature, coincided with a toughly worded statement in London by Foreign Minister Malcolm Rifkind, who urged China to reconsider its plan or face international pressure.
"Clearly this weekend is going to be a very disagreeable one," Patten said of Saturday's gathering of 400 of Hong Kong's elite who will meet over the border in the Chinese city of Shenzhen.
They will elect 60 new legislators to take over lawmaking next July 1.
On that day, Hong Kong reverts to Chinese sovereignty, after a century and a half under the British flag, with a treaty pledge from Beijing that it can stay a distinct entity with its laissez faire capitalist system intact for a further 50 years.
The transition has been bumpy since China decided to disband the elected Legislative Council and appoint a new interim body without a mass vote, rolling back the expansion of democracy ushered in by Patten over the past four years.
Democrats in Hong Kong have said they will mount legal challenges if the interim body meets in the territory before July 1.
Calling China's plan a "sad and bad decision to go ahead with the establishment of a rubber stamp legislative body", Patten said it was designed to reduce democrats involved in lawmaking and would have serious legal repercussions.
He said that if China insisted the body was in line with Sino-British handover accords, "let them join Britain in making a joint submission to the World Court, the International Court of Justice, so that we can actually get a ruling from the ICJ."
But Patten also said he would go ahead with efforts to help Hong Kong's future leader, shipping tycoon Tung Chee-hwa, to prepare his administration. Tung was picked this month by the same 400-strong Selection Committee choosing the legislature.
Patten said he would meet his successor on Monday to explore a framework for pre-handover cooperation.
"We will cooperate in helping him establish an office, in helping him prepare for July 1, 1997. We will do everything to cooperate within the Joint Declaration and the Basic Law. But there is absolutely no requirement whatsoever for a provisional legislature before July 1," he said.
He said China might be able to "trash an institution" but it could not "stamp out the spirit of democracy" in Hong Kong.
