China is poised to take a major step in reversing democratic reform in Hong Kong by creating a new legislature to replace the territory's elected body when Beijing resumes control of the British colony next year.
The die will be cast on Saturday when 400 Hong Kong people, carefully screened by China, meet over the border in the city of Shenzhen to appoint 60 legislators who will make Hong Kong's laws from July 1.
The "provisional legislature" will be installed after China disbands the elected Legislative Council (Legco) in a move to roll back political reforms introduced by Beijing's nemesis, departing colonial governor Chris Patten, since 1992.
The body that will choose the new parliamentarians is the Selection Committee, which also elected Tung Chee-hwa, a 59-year-old shipping tycoon with strong pro-Beijing loyalties, to succeed Patten as chief executive of the territory of 6.3 million people.
China resumes control of Hong Kong at midnight on June 30 next year, ending more than 150 years of British rule.
The Hong Kong public, who voted resoundingly for pro-democracy groups in Legco elections last year, have had no vote in the two selection processes organised by China and no say in the decision to remove the elected legislature.
The Sino-British quarrel over the provisional legislature set Tung and Patten on a collision course this week.
"A quarter of those who are lining up for jobs in this institution were beaten in regular elections ... It will be a blot on the first months of Chinese rule," Patten told a newspaper. "This echo chamber has no place in the political or administrative life of Hong Kong ... We will have nothing to do with it any form."
Tung responded in a speech to the business community by saying Britain must "face the reality" of the new legislature. He warned that if its legitimacy was challenged further he would get China's parliament to legislate on its legality.
Hong Kong's biggest pro-democracy group, the Democratic Party, is boycotting the selection process, which it brands as a plot to snuff out democracy and enact repressive laws.
"You won't find five of them who can be called democrats by any stretch of the imagination," Democratic Party leader Martin Lee told Reuters, commenting on the candidates.
The Democratic Party has expelled a rebel member, Dominic Chan, because he broke ranks to run for the new assembly.
The party is organising two days of protests against the provisional legislature, and China has beefed up security on the border in case demonstrators try to cross into Shenzhen, local media quoted Chinese sources as saying.
The Selection Committee will choose the 60 members of the provisional legislature from a list of 130 candidates.
Pro-Beijing parties fielding candidates denied critics' allegations this week that they had negotiated the result of the voting in advance in under-the-table horse-trading.
"There is definitely no carve-up of seats," said Liberal Party leader Allen Lee.
Each Selection Commitee member will vote by endorsing up to 60 names from among the candidates. The top 60 candidates -- those listed the most times -- will be appointed to the provisional legislature.
Among the candidates are 34 incumbent legislators, raising the prospect that Legco could be crippled well before Chinese rule, because the two legislatures' schedules could clash.
A poll by Hong Kong University indicated on Thursday that one-third of the public support the concept of the new legislature and one-quarter trust the Chinese government.
