Thumbing its nose at Britain, China brought Hong Kong's elected legislature a step closer to oblivion on Saturday when it founded a new lawmaking body to take over next July when it takes back the colony.
The birth of the Provisional Legislative Council in the frontier city of Shenzhen brought Hong Kong to a crucial turning point in its journey towards Chinese rule at midnight next June 30 and opened the way for a possible clash in the world court.
The body, stuffed with pro-China politicians and tycoons, was attacked by Britain, Washington and local protesters. London challenged China to let the International Court of Justice in The Hague rule on its legality.
The legislative body is a big crease in Sino-British relations that could cause instability in the territory in the run-up to the handover, now less than 200 days away.
The speaker of Hong Kong's Legislative Council and 32 other incumbent lawmakers were among the 60 members chosen by a 400-member China-controlled Selection Committee.
Congratulating the 60, Chinese Foreign Minister Qian Qichen declared the contest had been "just, fair, open and based on democratic principles" and had the approval of a wide spectrum of Hong Kong society.
Dominic Chan, recently expelled from the Democratic Party, Hong Kong's largest, also grabbed a seat. The Democratic Party has boycotted the selection as anti-democratic.
The winners included pro-China politicians such as Tsang Yok-sing, Elsie Tu and Peggy Lam, who were routed in 1995 Legco elections when more than a million people went to the polls and voted resoundingly for pro-democracy forces.
Pro-democracy groups staged noisy protests in Hong Kong declaring the Shenzhen meeting a "fake election" and a "black day for democracy". They launched 50 helium-filled balloons into China with a protest banner attached.
"Today we will have two legislatures...This is a constitutional crisis," said the Democratic Party's Andrew Cheng, a current legislator.
Beijing's communist rulers are bent on imposing themselves firmly on Hong Kong and on ending 150 years of national shame over the forced cession of the territory to Britain in 19th century wars over the opium trade.
Governor Chris Patten, who has introduced elements of democracy in this territory of 6.3 million people over the past four years, denounced the Shenzhen vote as a "bizarre farce".
"The reality is that over a million people in Hong Kong voted for the present Legislative Council. And up over the border now, 400 people -- 400 -- are voting for a so-called provisional legislature," Patten said on Saturday.
Dorothy Liu Yiu-chu, a Hong Kong member of China's parliament -- the National People's Congress -- and the Selection Committee, dissented and stayed away from the vote.
"I am sick. This is the official reason from the point of view of the Selection Committee. But I know, and I don't mind letting the world know, the real reason is that I don't agree to the establishment of the provisional legislature," she said.
Earlier this month she took part in the committee's first task, selecting shipping magnate Tung Chee-hwa as Patten's successor.
Tung dismissed Britain's suggestion of world court arbitration on Saturday, saying: "We cannot have a legal vacuum in 1997. This is a great day for Hong Kong."
China's official spokesman in Hong Kong, Zhang Junsheng, said Britain's challenge would not undermine the provisional legislature's authority.
"Establishing the provisional legislature is an internal affair of China. If Britain demands international arbitration it is absurd and ignorant," Zhang told the Mad Dog Daily.
The U.S. Consul-General in Hong Kong, Richard Boucher, called the legislature vote "a backward step".
"We think it's a bad idea and a mistake," Boucher said. "I don't think we would describe it as an open and fair election which is an essential part of Hong Kong's future stability and future business environment."
Democratic Party leader Martin Lee has vowed to seek a court injunction against the provisional body if it meets in Hong Kong before July 1.
"If this sham legislature is lawful, why not appoint it and have it meet in Hong Kong, where the Supreme Court can decide on its legality," Lee said on Friday.
