The skyscrapers are decked with fairy lights. Red-cloaked Santas pat children on the head. Christmas carols ring out. It is Christmas in Britain's last major colony, but will it ever be like this again?
The most spectacular Christmas light displays in the world are strung from Hong Kong's skyscrapers, featuring giant illuminated Santas and reindeer covering entire facades, beaming a rainbow of colours along the famed Hong Kong harbour skyline.
Hong Kong -- shopping paradise of the world -- is awash with Christmas. Its glass and marble malls brim with exorbitant festive displays, its shops push the fanciest, most expensive brand names in the world, specially repackaged for the season.
But after Britain pulls out and Communist-ruled china takes over next July, what then?
Will Christmas turkey, Christmas pudding and Christmas cake be allowed to grace the yuletide dinner table? Even if it does, will it taste the same?
Will revellers pull Christmas crackers and drink themselves silly in merriment as many do today?
Will China allow bourgeois extravagance and Western customs? Will charities run their "Operation Santa Claus" fundraising drive for the disadvantaged and underprivileged? Will Christians be free to worship at Midnight Mass?
If China lives up to its promises, the answer to all these questions is a resounding "yes".
China has promised to allow Hong Kong to retain its freewheeling capitalist system for a further 50 years, as a quasi-autonomous part of the motherland under a "one country two systems" policy. This means freedom of religion will stay. And the hybrid cocktail of customs and traditions, too.
However, many of Hong Kong 6.3 million people worried that pro-democracy protests such as a Christmas Eve vigil and the mass dispatch of Christmas cards to mainland dissidents by human rights groups on Tuesday might not be allowed again.
It is also doubtful if Queen Elizabeth's Christmas broadcast will ever again be on Hong Kong public radio and television."
Christmas is still going to be a holiday next year in Hong Kong, as is the other main Christian festival, Easter.
Only the Queen's official birthday and World War Two victory holidays are to be removed after China takes over.
And, in this overwhelmingly ethnic Chinese territory, there are more non-Chinese than ever, despite the gradual departure of expatriate colonial civil servants and company executives.
There are 37,000 Americans, 33,000 British and 30,000 Canadians, enough to keep a few Christmas parties going. The largest foreign group, 140,000 Filipinos, mostly brought in as servants, are also a strong Christian community.
Nevertheless, there are misgivings how much will remain the same in Hong Kong. And there's a whiff of melancholy and pre-nostalgia among expatriates this festive season.
It's almost like a "last supper", their minds tilted towards midnight next June 30, 1997, the moment when the British flag will be furled away here forever.
Hong Kong Governor Chris Patten's annual "Christmas Song Choice", which will be aired on local radio, reflects the mood.
His selection starts with Louis Armstrong singing "Basin Street Blues", followed by "As Time Goes By" by Jimmy Durante.
Patten gathered his family and friends on Wednesday night, Christmas night, for a traditional dinner of roast turkey.
All assembled were aware it could be the last Christmas dinner in the regal Government House overlooking the harbour.
Patten's successor Tung Chee-hwa, who will be Hong Kong's first Chinese leader, has indicated he doesn't want to live in the mansion that symbolises Hong Kong's one and a half centuries of British colonial rule and 150-plus years of China's national shame. He says the residence is cramped and inauspicious.
So no more Christmas there, at least.
Hong Kong's final year as a British colony has seen the balance of power tilt into China's orbit, even before the change of flag arrives. Chinese influence waxed and Britain's waned.
However, just as Christmas has become a commercial success in Japan, the festival will inevitably live on -- Chinese-style.
Hong Kong Chinese vie with each other to lavish expensive presents on their children.
Even over the border in mainland China, Christmas shopping sprees are catching on. There, Santa Claus has taken to riding a rickshaw, instead of a sleigh.
