Hong Kong's leader-in-waiting Tung Chee-hwa on Friday invited the territory's top official, Anson Chan, to meet him amid intense speculation over whether she might stay in her post after China takes over next year.
The two would meet over breakfast at Tung's villa on Hong Kong Island on Saturday morning, a government spokesman said. He did not say what they planned to discuss.
Chan, 56, is chief secretary and second-in-command to Governor Chris Patten, whom the 59-year-old Tung will succeed after the change of flag at midnight next June 30, bringing down the curtain on over 150 years of British colonial rule.
An opinion poll this month ranked Chan as the most popular political figure in Hong Kong with 73 percent of people saying they support her, well ahead of Tung himself, who scored a 65 percent approval rating.
Tung was selected by a China-controlled committee on December 11 to be Hong Kong's post colonial chief executive, the first Chinese leader in the territory's history.
With only 186 days left until the handover, Tung is moving quickly to assemble a cabinet and to hammer out his relationship with a provisional legislature that China created last week.
He has called an informal lunch meeting of the 60 legislature members next Monday, likely to discuss the scope of the body's lawmaking activities and possible candidates for speaker of the assembly, although no agenda has yet been set.
Chan was once touted as a possible candidate for the job that has fallen to Tung, but she bowed out from the race and declined to become an official candidate despite her popularity.
Many officials -- in Hong Kong, in Britain and in China -- respect Chan's administrative talent and consider the Tung-Chan ticket as a "dream team" scenario likely to promote Hong Kong's smooth transition to Chinese rule.
She has said she would like to see as many as possible of her policy secretaries -- equivalent to government ministers -- stay on, for the sake of stability in the civil service.
However, in the first sign of cracks in the upper echelon of the administration, one top official, Michael Leung, head of the Independent Commission Against Corruption, announced this week he would quit before the mid-1997 handover.
Local media speculated on Friday that Leung's move could be the first in an exodus of top officials unwilling to serve an administration under Beijing's thumb after Britain pulls out.
China has promised that Hong Kong can be a quasi-autonomous territory and keep its capitalist system for another 50 years, but many in the territory fear repressive communist-style rule.
On Friday, Hong Kong's Bar Association, which groups the territory's lawayers, said it had sent a 38-page report to China urging Beijing's communist rulers not to scrap Hong Kong's Bill of Rights.
China has signalled it will roll back the human rights law and a string of other laws and trappings of democracy after it resumes sovereignty.
