Hong Kong's top policeman said on Monday he was confident the territory's police could handle any disturbances after the July 1 handover to China without the help of China's People's Liberation Army.
Police Commissioner Eddie Hui, unveiling crime figures for 1996, told reporters that offences had fallen by 14 percent in the year, reaching a 15-year low and making Hong Kong one of the world's safest cities.
Hui was confident of tackling any crime problem, including mass disturbances, despite an exodus of senior officers, mainly expatriates, from the Royal Hong Kong Police Force.
China resumes sovereignty over Hong Kong on July 1 this year after a century and a half of British colonial rule. Many in Hong Kong have raised fears of a breakdown in law and order, including when the handover takes place at midnight on June 30.
Officers taking early retirement packages privately voice anxiety that Hong Kong's police will become tarnished by China-style corruption after the handover.
Pro-democracy politicians have warned that China could impose repressive laws and use its PLA garrison troops, whose colleagues crushed pro-democracy demonstrations in Beijing's Tiananmen Square in 1989, to keep order and put down protests.
Asked by Reuters if the police might call in the PLA to help deal with disturbances after the handover, Hui said: "I hope not. I can't foresee any situation which I cannot handle, which would require the assistance of the People's Liberation Army."
He said the exodus of officers from the service had not dented the force's ability to deal with mass disturbances in this freewheeling city of 6.3 million people.
"The senior officers who are leaving have little to do with crowd control," he said, adding that the force had sent many officers abroad for training in recent years and was prepared to deal with any outbreak of unrest.
"The overall manpower situation is very sound," he said.
Police Deputy Commissioner for Operations, Peter Wong, dismissed suggestions that the police were being pushed by China to get tough with political demonstrators, after a year of confrontations involving pro-democracy groups hostile to China.
"We're under no pressure from anybody in dealing with demonstrations," Wong said, adding that the Hong Kong police respected the population's right to demonstrate peacefully.
The enforcement of Hong Kong laws would remain solely the prerogative of the Hong Kong Police, he said.
Hui said 155 expatriates had asked to retire in the run-up to the handover, representing just five percent of the total of 3,000 senior officers on the force.
Asked to give reasons for the police's success in whittling down crime, Hui said he had sent more police out on the beat.
"We have moved a lot of our officers to the front line, to the streets, to make our presence more visible," he said.
He said Beijing's crackdown on crime last year had contributed to a more peaceful Hong Kong, where crime often has mainland links.
He said cooperation with Chinese police would be stepped up after the handover when Hong Kong's Interpol office, now a sub-group of Britain, would become a sub-group of China.
The force is to drop the word "royal" from its name and abandon the British insignia on July 1.
But it will continue to work in both English and Chinese and will retain exclusive responsibility to maintain law and order and police the Hong Kong side of the border with China, he said.
