Hong Kong's property sector on Thursday assailed the government over new measures to try to curb sky-high housing prices.
Property developers and analysts said the measures announced on Wednesday were not only inappropriate in a free-wheeling society but also may not work.
"It is an unwarranted intervention in normal commercial decision-making process," the Real Estate Developers' Association of Hong Kong said in a statement.
"It attacks the very foundation of Hong Kong's free market economy principle."
The government's regulations require developers to put unfinished flats on to the market earlier than before.
Private flats must now be put up for sale 15 months before they are ready instead of 12 months previously.
For government-subsidised flats, the period has been extended to 24 months from between 12 and 18 months at present.
In addition, developers will have to put flats on to the market within six months of the government granting approval for them to sell, and to release no less than 20 percent of every batch of housing units that is built.
The moves quickly drew fire.
Some analysts said the government was tackling only the symptoms of the problem and not tackling its roots.
"You can go on for eternity producing short-term remedies. All they are doing is dealing with the symptoms at the moment, and not dealing with the actual cause (that) can only be eradicated by planning," said Paul Dwyer, head of Vigers Corporate Valuation Consultancy.
Another analyst with an Asian firm said the measures could backfire.
"This mere pushing forward of units in an environment where supply is already very tight...if anything, will provide room for more speculation as more units are in the market now," he said.
"Prices could rise faster as demand is very strong, so the government is actually shooting itself in the foot," he said.
While the government's pledge to release some 587 hectares (1,450 acres) of land for residential use earned some bouquets, the property community urged it to do more.
"We've got industrial land but nobody wants to build on industrial space in Hong Kong," said Dwyer.
"It's a matter of rezoning this land, putting money in to create the infrastructure and enhancing the environmental atmosphere, then you'll be able to use this land for residential purposes."
A major property developer, who declined to be identified, criticised as unfair the requirement to push on to the market at least 20 percent of unfinished flats in every batch of units.
"It's like a regulation requiring a restaurant to cook 20 percent of its eggs, 20 percent of its lamb, regardless of whether they have customers outside," he told Reuters.
Hong Kong's seemingly endless property boom, which has not been threatened by the British territory's imminent handover to Chinese rule, was highlighted this week when developer Sino Land Co Ltd paid a record HK$11.82 billion (US$1.53 billion) for a residential site on Hong Kong island.
--Hong Kong newsroom (852) 28436441
