An advisor to Governor Chris Patten's inner cabinet said on Monday that property in Hong Kong has become like gold that is not merely worn but kept and accumulated -- giving rise to abnormal demand.
Chen Kwan-yiu, a member on the executive council, also hinted that a quick fix to the British colony's property woes was unlikely.
"The current supply of flats is actually adequate for demand, but property has become like gold in the 60s, when it was not only used but was kept as an investment," Chen said.
"So it has led to an abnormal demand," Chen told reporters. The economist said the solution to the problem was to provide more land for residential use.
Hong Kong's property sector has been in the news in recent months with the government and private property developers coming under intense public fire for soaring housing prices.
Many young working adults in Hong Kong continue to live with their parents due to notoriously high rents, and the option of owning a home is increasingly seen beyond the reach of many of the territory's 6.4 million population.
"If ever we see a revolution in Hong Kong, it'll be over housing. Young people don't have a hope in hell to own their own homes anymore," retiree Alex Lo, 55, told Reuters.
"It's now the giant property developers who control Hong Kong," said Lo, who lives in a tiny government flat in Tai Po with his wife and three children in their twenties.
Hong Kong has much on its mind as the handover to Chinese rule at midnight on June 30 nears, and in the last few weeks has had to cope with extra stress caused by the housing woes.
On March 12, a box thought to contain a bomb planted outside the legislative council building in the territory's Central district froze traffic for several hours.
The box turned out to be empty, but its message was no less troubling. Writing on the box complained that the government and the territory's future leader, Tung Chee-hwa, did not care about soaring property prices.
And on Thursday, a fist-fight broke out at a flat sale. One property agent was knocked out and two guards were arrested.
The government last week acted to curb speculation by requiring developers to put more unfinished flats on the market The move was followed by a 25 basis point rise in the prime lending rate to 8.75 percent, which bankers said could marginally affect the property market.
But they seemed to have little effect.
Ever-strong demand led developer Cheung Kong (Holdings) Ltd to release more units on Sunday in the sale of part of its Kingswood Villas development in the New Territories.
A total of 600 units, priced mostly at HK$4,793 (US$620) per square foot, was sold in addition to the 264 flats originally put up for sale.
(US$1 = HK$7.73)
