Philippine Foreign Secretary Domingo Siazon will press Hong Kong leaders over the fate of Filipino workers who fear China might kick them out after it takes over the territory in July, diplomats said on Thursday.
Siazon, who was to arrive in Hong Kong late on Thursday, will meet governor Chris Patten and future Hong Kong chief Tung Chee-hwa plus members of the 140,000 strong Filipino community, the largest expatriate group in the territory.
Siazon, who will stay until Saturday, is expected to officially announce Manila's March 26 decision to waive visas for holder's of Hong Kong's post-colonial passport, an official at the Philippine consulate said.
Hong Kong, a British colony for more than 150 years, will become a Special Administrative Region (SAR) of China on July 1.
Most of the Philippine workers living in the territory are maids, whose presence helps fuel Hong Kong's vibrant economy by freeing up local mothers to work.
But with Hong Kong becoming part of China from July 1, many Filipinos fear they will replaced by an influx of domestic servants from mainland China.
"Mr Siazon might seek assurances from the government and especially from Tung that the Filipinas in Hong Kong will be allowed to continue to live and work in the territory after 1997 under the same conditions," said a source at Manila's consulate.
"He may also seek clarification on whether mainland helpers will be allowed to work in Hong Kong," the source said.
Cynthia Tellez, director of the Mission for Filipino Migrant Workers in Hong Kong, a key support group, said her community hoped Siazon could get clear assurances from the future Hong Kong government they can continue to work and live in Hong Kong.
"The last statement from China was that as long as we remain helpful to Hong Kong, the status quo will remain. But it's quite vague and nothing is written about it," she said.
"They feel concerned whether their positions would be taken by mainland women," she said, voicing fears that Hong Kong employers and future authorities, might prefer to allow more mainland Chinese women to work as maids.
Tellez also stressed that the Philippine government needed to address the wider concern of Filipinos working overseas.
"What is there when we go back home, will I have something to look forward to?" she said.
The Hong Kong Filipino community are part of a diaspora of four million Filipinos, according to official data, working abroad to support families in their relatively poor country.
Tellez said the number of Filipinos working overseas was probably as high as seven million, when taking into account illegal workers.
Spread over 137 countries the world over, the guest workers remit US$7 billion each year back to the Philippines.
