Hong Kong's future leader Tung Chee-hwa assured Philippine Foreign Secretary Domingo Siazon on Friday that Filipino workers working in the territory will be allowed to stay after it reverts to Chinese rule on July 1.
Siazon, who arrived in the territory late on Thursday, said he also officially told Tung of Manila's decision in late March to waive visa requirements for Hong Kong holders of post-handover passports when they visit the Philippines.
Hong Kong, a British colony of more than 150 years, will become a Special Administrative Region (SAR) under Chinese rule at the stroke of midnight on June 30.
Nearly 140,000 Philippine workers, mainly working as maids, live in the vibrant territory.
But with Hong Kong becoming part of China, many Filipinos fear they will be expelled and replaced through an influx of domestic servants from mainland China.
Siazon said such worries were unwarranted.
"Mr Tung said he does not see any change to the status of the Filipinos working here," he said in an interview.
"They are contributing to the Hong Kong economy and in the future, this will not change," he said.
An estimated seven million Filipinos working in more than 137 countries remit about US$7 billion each year back to their relatively poor country.
Siazon, who spoke with Tung for half an hour, also met Governor Chris Patten and Financial Secretary Donald Tsang in separate meetings.
He said his country's granting of visa-free entry to Hong Kong passport holders was a pledge of Manila's support for the territory during its sovereignty change.
"We have decided to recognise the Hong Kong SAR passport and have (them) visa-free because we have full confidence in the future of Hong Kong and the smooth transition of Hong Kong from British to Chinese rule," he said.
"I told Mr Tung the Philippines is deeply committed to supporting Hong Kong's role in the future because Hong Kong is a big trading and investment partner," he said.
Each year, some 350,000 Filipinos visit Hong Kong while 290,000 Hong Kong people visit the Philippines and both governments were keen to continue the close friendship, he said.
Siazon said he had invited Tung to visit Manila.
"But right now he's extremely busy, so it will probably be after the transition," he said.
