The New York Mercantile Exchange (NYMEX) signed an agreement on Thursday to hook up the Hong Kong Futures Exchange (HKFE) to its NYMEX ACCESS trading system, a move that may challenge Singapore's trading headstart.
Officials from both exchanges said Hong Kong's cash trading base and trading expertise could not compare with Singapore's, especially in the energy field, but rising oil and metals use in Asia, particularly China, would see a growing demand for risk management and hedging opportunities.
"I see great potential in China, refineries in South Korea and the rest of Asia, potential that provides the key to this (linkage)," NYMEX president Patrick Thompson said at a news conference after the agreement was signed in Hong Kong.
The link with Hong Kong, expected to go into operation around the end of March 1997, would allow HKFE members to trade existing NYMEX futures and options contracts on the ACCESS system during local Hong Kong trading hours under a mutual-offset system.
The agreement with the HKFE seemed to throw into doubt NYMEX's intention expressed in 1994 to cooperate with the Singapore International Monetary Exchange (SIMEX), where two energy contracts already trade, albeit sluggishly.
While officials of the exchanges denied that rivalry with Singapore had catapulted Hong Kong into Thursday's deal, Thompson suggested the linkup with Hong Kong -- and with Sydney in 1995 -- would render a linkup with SIMEX more unlikely.
"Talks are progressing very, very slowly and Singapore is certainly not as much of a priority with us now as previously," Thompson said, adding the deal with the HKFE would introduce constraints that would affect any future deal with SIMEX.
SIMEX would also be cut out of any new futures and options contracts that NYMEX was working to introduce in Asia with the help of a newly formed Oil Advisory Committee.
The committee, made up of 30 members from Asia's oil community, would work out new contracts tailored to physical products traded in the region in terms of pricing and quality.
The first meeting, held last week in Singapore, brought together representatives from state oil companies, major oil players, Wall Street traders and top brokers, all of whom were eager to see the introduction of new oil futures contracts.
"We were gratified by the interest shown...and the unanimous crying need for new products," Thompson said, adding new contracts would be launched not with SIMEX but with the HKSE.
New crude and gas oil (diesel) futures contracts received overwhelming votes from the committee, but more meetings would be held to determine the type and specifications of the new product as well as its pricing formula, Thompson said.
NYMEX, the world's largest physical commodity exchange, offers contracts on the benchmark West Texas Intermediate crude, heating oil, natural gas and unleaded gasoline on its energy complex and gold, silver and copper on the metals complex.
NYMEX, together with its COMEX division, trades a daily volume of 310,000 contracts each day during day trading hours.
Its overnight ACCESS system rakes in around 5,000 contracts each night, and the volume has risen between 25 to 30 percent each year since it was launched in 1993.
Hong Kong would be the fifth location where ACCESS trades can be executed, after New York, Sydney, Chicago and London.
NYMEX officials will visit Hong Kong in coming months to train exchange members in energy and metals futures trading, said Ivers Riley, chief of the HKFE.
-- Hong Kong newsroom +852 2843 6441
