Hong Kong property prices have tumbled 10 percent from recent peaks and are poised to fall further as speculators turn nervous following recent steps by the government to cool the market, analysts said on Wednesday.
Transactions have also dipped and some buyers have reneged on contracts, preferring to forego deposits rather than face further possible price falls, real estate brokers said.
"Sentiment on the property market has turned bearish," said Raymond Ngai, property analyst with UBS Securities.
"There will be a consolidation and property prices will fall by up to 20 percent by the end of this quarter," he said.
Property brokers said prices have already fallen five to 10 percent from recent peaks.
The bearish sentiment comes after the government, under intense pressure to cool sharply rising prices, in late March took steps to speed the flow of new flats into the market.
Flats can now be presold 15 months before completion, up from 12 months, and developers must offer them no more than six months after receiving government approval for presales in batches no smaller than 20 percent of the total available.
Compounded by a 25 basis point rise in prime lending rates to 8.75 percent, the bubble enveloping Hong Kong's property market has sprung a leak, analysts said.
Prices have dipped by at least five percent in the last week compared to better weeks seen in late 1996 and early 1997, while the number of transactions in popular private estates in Hong Kong have dipped five percent, real estate brokers said.
In some flashy locations like the Midlevels on Hong Kong island, some buyers or speculators have even reneged on deals, preferring to forego their deposits as they feared taking up mortgages in the face of falling prices, brokers said.
"Some people have reneged on deals, as many as two out of 10 units, especially in the pricier districts," said one property consultant who declined to be named.
"It's now a buyer's market, buyers call the shots," said May Toh, a broker with Glory Property Company.
Secretary for Housing Dominic Wong said confirmers, traders buy a property and then resell it before assignment procedures are completed whose activities give a broad indication of speculation, were cutting prices to move their holdings.
Some analysts described the thaw in prices as healthy because the sharp ascent in the last year was unsustainable.
The government curbs and the interest rate hike were merely catalysts for a correction that was long overdue, they said.
"Over the last six months, property prices have gone up very sharply, by 30 percent, so it is a healthy development now, with the market consolidating," Ngai said.
"The curbs, interest rate increase were just catalysts for the downturn in sentiment, the main reason is because prices went up too fast," Ngai said.
Tycoon Lee Shau-kee, chairman of Henderson Land Development Co Ltd, told Reuters on Wednesday residential property prices should stabilise after falling five to 10 percent.
"Property prices in the secondary market have fallen five to 10 percent in April from (levels) in early March and turnover has been reduced significantly," Lee said. "The prices should stabilise after the recent adjustment."
Housing in Hong Kong is notoriously expensive and many of its 6.4 million population fear being unable to buy homes.
Irked by sharply rising prices since mid 1996, anonymous residents have planted a fake bomb and threatened to poison top government officials who they accuse of ignoring the problem.
-- HONG KONG NEWSROOM (852) 2843-6441
