Hong Kong's future leader Tung Chee-hwa on Wednesday launched plans to turn back the clock and curb demonstrations and foreign funding for political parties after the territory is handed back to China this year.
The planned changes, though controversial, were expected after China's parliament, or National People's Congress, resolved in late February that a string of existing Hong Kong laws protecting civil liberties and rights should be changed.
China's decision, based on the argument that existing laws breach Hong Kong's post-handover constitution, takes effect on July 1, when the British colony of 156 years reverts to China.
It will also remove at a stroke democratic freedoms introduced during the office of British Governor Chris Patten, whom China considers an arch-foe.
Top civil servant Michael Suen, who has been seconded to Tung's office to help craft the post-handover government, said the changes, outlined in a consultation paper released to the media, were needed because of China's decision.
The NPC took the action because China views the political liberalisation of Hong Kong in the twilight years of British rule as a breach of its handover agreements with Britain.
"The reason for this whole exercise is because of the legal vacuum caused by the NPC...so we are inviting public comments on the proposals," Suen, secretary for policy coordination, told a news conference.
Under the plans, societies and political parties would have to be registered and might be refused registration if they are known to have ties to or receive donations from foreign political organisations or individuals.
People wishing to hold demonstrations would have to get permission from police seven days in advance.
Demonstrations should only be staged after the police issue a notice of "no objection". Under the current system, the police need only be notified beforehand.
Suen said the proposals complied with Hong Kong's Basic Law, the post-handover constitution, and were above world standards.
"In working out the proposals, we adhere to the principle that they must be in full compliance with the Basic Law and consistent with the provisions of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights," Suen said.
Echoing the well-worn words of his boss, Tung Chee-hwa, Suen also said the changes were necessary to strike a balance between civil liberties and social order.
"We must strike a balance between civil liberties and social stability, personal rights and social obligations, individual interests and the common good," Suen said.
"Within the generality of this commitment, we seek to establish broad consensus among the people of Hong Kong as to where the balance should lie."
The public was invited to give comments on the plans in a pulse-taking exercise over the next three weeks, Suen said.
Legislation drafted on the basis of the proposals will be enacted by a controversial China-anointed provisional legislature which replaces the elected Legislative Council on July 1.
The departing colonial power Britain, some of its allies and Hong Kong democracy groups have attacked all the moves as a reversal of democratic freedoms in this territory of 6.4 million people.
Under the Sino-British agreements on the handover, Hong Kong has been guaranteed a high degree of autonomy for 50 years.
