One of the most enduring bastions of the British empire in the Far East will fade into memory on Friday when Britain closes its last Hong Kong naval base, HMS Tamar.
The closure of the naval base, on Stonecutters Island, comes ahead of the July 1 handover, when Britain returns Hong Kong, its colony of more than 150 years, to China.
From July 1, the island will house the Chinese garrison.
In a precursor to Friday's event, the Royal Navy on Thursday launched a new book marking its history in the colonial outpost of Hong Kong since 1840.
Major-General Bryan Dutton, commander of the British Forces in Hong Kong, told Reuters the closure of Tamar would be a sad ending to a long historical era.
"Well, I'm very sad to see HMS Tamar close but it's a fact of life, it's going to be a fact of history," said Dutton.
"We are proud of the part the navy and the forces at large have played in Hong Kong over the last 157 years," he said.
"The important thing is that we do it well, we do it with some style. We will go out with our heads held high," he said.
HMS Tamar is home to three patrol craft - HMS Plover, Peacock and Starling - the last remaining ships of the Hong Kong Squadron as the garrison winds down ahead of the handover.
Accompanied by music from the Band of the Royal Marines, over 200 marines from the Royal Navy will parade in front of the quarter deck as the White Ensign is lowered for the last time.
As the British army prepares to leave, Sino-British representatives handling details of Hong Kong's handover are finalising details of an advance party of Chinese troops to be stationed in the territory before the handover.
Dutton said an agreement on the advance party was near.
"I'm hopeful there will be a sensible outcome in the near future, I think they're probably getting near an agreement."
It will not only be the British who will be affected by the closure of the Tamar base.
Lo Ying, 74, who has worked with the Royal Navy in Hong Kong as a cleaner for more than 50 years, will also be retiring.
"We will be retiring, the gweilos are going back," she said. "Gweilo" is a Chinese nickname for foreigners, translated as "foreign devils".
