Future Hong Kong lawmakers on Saturday agreed on a formula to pass laws for the territory in face of mounting anger over Beijing's plans to roll back civil liberties after taking back sovereignty from Britain.
The provisional legislature met in the Chinese city of Shenzhen, just across the border from Hong Kong, to decide the format which will enable it to pass bills, including those to dilute existing Hong Kong laws protecting civil rights.
The China-crafted interim chamber, which Beijing intends to put in place of the present elected legislature at the handover, agreed all three required readings of proposed bills could take place before July 1.
The bills would then be confirmed and made into laws on July 1, the local cable television station reported. Hong Kong, a British colony for more than 150 years, reverts to China at midnight on June 30.
The move followed a heated debate this week after the territory's future leader, Tung Chee-hwa, launched plans to curb protests and foreign funding of Hong Kong political groups after the handover.
"Some members feel that since we have been empowered to scrutinise and to pass laws before July 1, then that power should be used before July 1," provisional legislator Selina Chow said.
"(It will) enable some absolutely essential legislation to enjoy the certainty of having been passed before July 1 so as to avoid a legal vacuum."
Pro-democracy activists have threatened to sue the 60-strong provisional chamber if it passes any laws, holds meetings or opens offices on Hong Kong soil before July 1.
Hong Kong democrats regard the interim legislature as a breach of the territory's post-handover constitution. Earlier, they launched a protest banner attached to dozens of colourful helium-filled balloons.
"Against the provisional legislature passing laws before July 1," the banner read. The protesters cheered as it floated towards China.
Tung's proposals on civil liberties were widely expected after Beijing resolved in February to repeal or amend existing Hong Kong laws protecting freedoms and political rights. But the plan has sparked a fiery debate locally and drawn criticism from the United States.
Hong Kong people will need police permission to demonstrate after July 1, a far cry from the current practice of merely notifying police beforehand.
With the lawmaking formula in place, the provisional chamber is now in a position to enact Tung's plans into law. Hong Kong's 6.4 million people have been given three weeks to comment on the proposals.
The rights issue looked sure to remain in the international spotlight after U.S. officials said Secretary of State Madeleine Albright would hold talks on Monday with the leader of Hong Kong's democracy movement Martin Lee, now on a lobbying and fund-raising mission in the United States.
But there is little to suggest that China will yield to pressure over its plans.
Chinese Foreign Minister Qian Qichen on Friday praised the provisional legislature and its work, a local newspaper said.
In a Beijing meeting with Rita Fan, president of the provisional chamber, Qian was quoted by Fan as saying he was very satisfied with the interim chamber and would give his full support.
