Hong Kong's colonial government cautioned Beijing on Monday not to cause constitutional problems by enacting laws for the territory before Britain hands it back to China at midnight on June 30.
Security Secretary Peter Lai said Beijing might spark a flurry of lawsuits that would work against its declared aim of a smooth transition for the territory.
Lai's warning came after Hong Kong's future lawmakers in a China-appointed provisional legislature said they would develop laws for the territory before July 1, when more than 150 years of British colonial rule officially will end.
Residency rights, or so-called "right of abode", in Hong Kong after the handover are among the issues that China wants the body to decide before the handover, but the Hong Kong government is opposed, Lai said.
"We clearly cannot accept this because there can only be one legislature for Hong Kong before July 1, and that is the legally constituted Legislative Council of Hong Kong which exists today," Lai told reporters.
The 60-member provisional legislature that Beijing intends to put in place of the elected legislature faces fierce opposition from the vocal pro-democracy camp.
Democrats have vowed to sue the body if it tries to make laws before July 1.
While Britain and China have agreed on major provisions on right of abode, they are deadlocked on actual legislation. Any attempt by the interim legislature to enact it into law before the handover would spell trouble, Lai said.
"Immigration/nationality matters are a notoriously litigious area...if decisions have to be taken on the basis of legislation processed by the provisional legislature before July 1, they would attract a huge amount of litigation which could paralyse the immigration system in Hong Kong after June 30," he said.
"That would be highly unconducive to a smooth transition."
Hugh Davies, Britain's envoy to joint Sino-British talks on the handover, blamed Beijing for failing to reach agreements.
"We have been unable to do so (reach agreements)...because (China) is insisting this is a matter in legislative terms for the provisional legislature, which is a most undesirable outcome."
The issue on right of abode in Hong Kong after July 1 is very close to the hearts of 750,000 Hong Kong people who have obtained foreign citizenship in recent years but who also value their permanent residency rights in Hong Kong.
Uncertainty has prompted a scramble for air tickets among migrants anxious to land in Hong Kong before midnight June 30.
Emigrants can establish permanent right of abode in Hong Kong if they return within 18 months of the handover, the Hong Kong and Macau Affairs Office in Beijing said.
Hong Kong Chinese will retain Hong Kong permanent residency status unless they stay away for more than 36 months before resettling in the territory, a spokesman for the office said.
The Hong Kong government warning appeared unlikely to stop China's plan. Rita Fan, president of the interim legislature, vowed to press on and make the draft right of abode bill into law the moment it is submitted to the provisional legislature.
"The council would commence to scrutinise the bill and ensure the procedure of three readings of the bill be completed before June 30...the legislation would then be confirmed on July 1," Fan said in a statement.
