Britain and China on Tuesday agreed to let Chinese troops into Hong Kong ahead of its return to China, but the accord was marred by a looming quarrel over residency rights after the handover.
Hong Kong, a British colony of more than 150 years, will become a Special Administrative Region under China on July 1.
The fight over residency rights, or "right of abode", is of concern to 750,000 Hong Kong people who have obtained foreign citizenship and now are unsure if they also will have the right to live permanently in Hong Kong after the handover.
Last week, future leader Tung Chee-hwa proposed measures to curb protests in the territory and bar political parties from receiving overseas donations after July 1.
With 77 days to go before China regains soverignty over Hong Kong, fewer people in the territory of 6.4 million say they are finding reasons to celebrate.
In a telephone poll for the daily South China Morning Post, 57 percent of 586 people surveyed last week said they would be happy on June 30, a drop of nine percentage points compared with a similar survey in February.
Those who said they were saddened by the sovereignty change rose to 17 percent from 11 percent. The English-language daily said it was the first decline in good feelings about the handover since August last year.
On Monday, Beijing announced rules on who would qualify for the "right of abode" in Hong Kong after July 1.
Britain quickly accused China of going it alone on an issue that should have been settled in diplomatic talks.
Beijing further angered Britain by saying it would send the residency bill to the provisional legislature it has appointed to replace the elected Legislative Council on July 1, and not to the current lawmaking body.
"It's our domestic affair. We don't need the British to tell us who is a Chinese national," reports from Beijing quoted China's top Hong Kong policy official Lu Ping as saying.
Firmly contradicting Britain, Lu said the issue had never been on the agenda of Sino-British diplomatic negotiations on the details of the sovereignty transfer.
More trouble appears to lay ahead over the issue.
Government-funded Radio Television Hong Kong reported on Tuesday that the British-led Hong Kong government will not extend any help to China, potentially jamming further talks.
"The government said it won't cooperate with China in drafting of right of abode legislation if it is put to the provisional legislature before the handover," it reported.
But on Tuesday, the Hong Kong government suddenly announced a breakthrough accord over the stationing of an advance party of 40 Chinese soldiers in the territory ahead of the handover, ending months of deadlock over the unit's size and role.
"They (PLA soldiers) will not be armed and will not enjoy any special legal status or...privileges and immunities," a government spokesman said.
Hugh Davies, a chief British representative in a joint Sino-British group handling Hong Kong's handover, said more Chinese troops would move in over the next few months.
"We haven't got a timetable, we are still talking to the Chinese side about future numbers, but clearly within the next two and a half months, that's not a great deal of time, we would expect some more to arrive shortly before the arrival of the main body of the People's Liberation Army," he told reporters.
The PLA advance guard will prepare the facilities for the PLA garrison due to take over defence duties from the British army's "Black Watch" regiment on July 1. The PLA garrison might eventually be up to 10,000-strong, military sources say.
