China and Britain agreed on Wednesday to release large tracts of land in Hong Kong for development, but the accord failed to impress experts who said more must be done to address the territory's housing woes.
Housing experts and analysts criticised the amount targeted for residential use as too small and unlikely to reassure many of Hong Kong's 6.4 million population that they will be able to afford to buy homes.
Under terms of the agreement, a total 98.76 hectares (244 acres) of land will be disposed of between now and June 30, and only 12.27 hectares (29.7 acres) will be for residential use.
The rest will be for commercial, industrial and other uses, with 70.19 hectares (173.4 acres) alone for a container terminal.
"I don't think it's anything major and I don't think it's significant unless they say they are releasing substantially more land, say over the next five years," Stephen Kidd, research manager with Vigers Hong Kong Ltd, said.
"The land for residential use does not seem to be a whole lot," Francis Lui, director of Centre for Economic Development at the Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, said.
"I'm surprised they are only allocating such a small amount for residential use, it's a small slice of a big pie," Lui said.
The agreement, under a long-term land disposal programme in Hong Kong, was signed by both Britain and China. Development of the land to be released will straddle the territory's return to Chinese rule at midnight this June 30.
From July 1, Hong Kong will be known as a Special Administrative Region (SAR) under China.
Wednesday's accord comes amid public anger over spiralling property prices, which has prompted residents to plant fake bombs and send death threats to officials, accusing them of doing nothing to solve the problem.
For many in rich Hong Kong, owning a flat has become merely a dream and adults well into their thirties, or even older, still live under the same roof as their parents.
Growing anger prompted the government last month to take steps to force private developers to release flats more quickly into the market to crack down on speculation.
The move produced a knee-jerk effect. Within weeks, brokers reported falls of up to five percent in transactions and prices.
But analysts said Wednesday's accord, part of a long-term programme, was unlikely to yield the same impact, as the market would have already discounted it.
"This is not new," said an analyst with an U.S. investment house, who declined to be named.
Lui said what was more important was to make public a comprehensive long-term plan committed to releasing more land for residential use.
"This is just a short-term provision, the most important thing is how much land will be supplied in the long term.
"People would rather look at land supply for the next 10 years, it's important to have a long-term commitment."
Proceeds from the land disposal will go into the Land Fund, which will be handed over to the future Hong Kong SAR government. The fund now stands at around HK$140 billion (US$18 billion).
