Hong Kong's future leader Tung Chee-hwa, who plans to ban foreign donations to political groups, was strongly criticised on Saturday after he acknowledged having donated money to Britain's Conservative Party.
Critics labelled Tung a hypocrite and accused him of double standards, saying his credibility as Hong Kong's leader after China takes it back from Britain on July 1 was now at stake.
Tung's office confirmed a front-page report in the English-language South China Morning Post that he had donated 50,000 sterling (US$81,500) to the Conservative Party before Britain's April 1992 general election.
The disclosure comes at a sensitive time, just days after Tung launched plans to ban foreign donations to political parties in Hong Kong after the handover on the grounds that he did not want foreigners meddling in local politics.
"As a person, I have in the past made modest donations to the Conservative Party," Tung said. "This is a fact well-known to everybody and, as a result, I am particularly sensitive that this should not happen in Hong Kong."
A Tung aide told the newspaper that billionaire Tung had made the donation in a personal capacity when he was chairman of shipping group Orient Overseas (International) Ltd.
He resigned from that position last October to run for leader after Governor Chris Patten leaves the British colony.
Tung was appointed by Patten as a member of the executive council, or inner cabinet, in October 1992, the same year he donated the sum to the Conservatives.
Tung's critics on Saturday took aim at him.
"It's really too much for him to do it and then say others cannot do it. It's a question of hypocrisy and double standards and sort of saying 'don't do as I do, do as I say,'" legislator and pro-democracy activist Emily Lau told Reuters.
Tung could see his credibility suffer, said law professor Nihal Jayawickrama at the University of Hong Kong.
"It must affect his credibility if you take up high ground and then you're shown up as having done previously what you are now preaching against," he told Reuters.
"If he had such strong views about foreigners getting involved in election campaigns and party funds then why did he do that, did it create so much damage to the British system?"
"And if it didn't create damage to the British system, why does he think it'll create damage to the Hong Kong system?"
The news coincided with a diplomatic coup scored by Martin Lee, leader of the popular Democratic Party, who met United States President Bill Clinton at the White House in Washington on Friday.
Tung, who previously enjoyed a high popularity rating, has seen his ratings fall in recent weeks, particularly after he launched plans to curb public demonstrations as well as the ban on foreign funding, which he argued were for "national security."
If his plans go ahead, police permission will be needed to hold protests, while police need only be notified now.
Meanwhile, an unarmed advance party of 40 soldiers from China's People's Liberation Army (PLA) will arrive on Monday to prepare in advance the logistics for the Chinese garrison that will replace British troops on July 1.
Many of Hong Kong's 6.4 million people fear the PLA, recalling the bloody 1989 military crackdown on student activists in Tiananmen Square in Beijing.
