Hong Kong's future leader Tung Chee-hwa faces mounting woes as the territory's handover to China nears, with a political funding scandal brewing and a democratic critic scoring a success at the White House.
Tung, who will lead Hong Kong when the British territory reverts to China at midnight June 30, caused shockwaves on Friday when he said he had made a 50,000 sterling (US$81,500) donation to Britain's Conservative Party in 1992.
The disclosure, made just days after he launched plans to ban foreign funding to local political groups and curb demonstrations after the handover, had critics accusing him of hypocrisy and double standards.
Tung, who has suffered declines in recent popularity polls, was further embarrassed last week when his political opponent and leader of Hong Kong's democracy movement, Martin Lee, met U.S. President Bill Clinton at the White House.
From the meeting on Friday, Lee won an assurance that Hong Kong was important to the United States and a warning from Clinton to China to abide by Sino-British treaties under which Hong Kong is promised a high level of self rule for 50 years.
"A winner in Washington," hailed the headline of an editorial in the English-language Sunday Morning Post.
Tung, who cancelled a pre-handover visit to the United States midweek, saying he was too busy, has come across the poorer, the newspaper said.
"The spectacular success of the Martin Lee visit sits in stark contrast to what has become the non-visit of Tung Chee-hwa," the editorial said.
The territory of 6.4 million is faced with a barrage of issues that include proposals to curb political freedoms and questions on who is entitled to residency rights.
Tung's plans to curb demonstrations and ban foreign funding were expected after China's parliament resolved in February that laws protecting civil liberties and rights should be changed.
Tung has argued that foreign funding must be banned because he did not want foreigners meddling in domestic politics.
Referring to Tung's donation in 1992, Nihal Jayawickrama, a law professor of the University of Hong Kong, said, "Obviously at that time, he didn't think there was anything objectionable in making contributions to party funds whether to influence elections results, or whatever in another country."
Jayawickrama said the restrictions Tung has proposed are really China-inspired proposals.
"It seems to me that China is expressing a desire to see that any independent political group would be subject to very strict scrutiny," he told Reuters.
British Governor Chris Patten also noted China's role in the proposals, saying on local radio Beijing simply did not trust Hong Kong to run itself sensibly and responsibly.
"The decision seems to be based on their wish to have a tighter control over life here. They don't -- they should but they don't -- yet trust Hong Kong."
