History will be made on Monday when an advance party of the Chinese army takes up position in Hong Kong against the backdrop of a raging quarrel on aspects of the territory's return to China.
The 40-strong advance party will arrive in the British colony on Queen Elizabeth's birthday to ready the garrison for the People's Liberation Army (PLA) troops which will march in on July 1, when Britain bows out after over 150 years of rule.
Led by Major-General Zhou Borong, the recce party will drive into Hong Kong in eight PLA staff cars and trucks from China's Shenzhen city in full uniform -- but unarmed.
The arrival of the advance guard is set against a backdrop of fears in this bustling territory of 6.4 million which reverts to Chinese rule at midnight on June 30.
On Sunday, more than 1,000 Hong Kong people took to the streets to protest against curbs on civil liberties which future leader Tung Chee-hwa vowed in early April to enforce from July.
Tung, who was carefully selected under China's auspices in December, plans to curb protests and ban foreign funding for local political groups which he argues are necessary for social order and to prevent foreigners meddling in domestic politics.
His move, though expected after China's parliament in February resolved to drop or amend existing laws protecting civil liberties and rights, has provoked a storm of local protests and criticism from the United States.
Under joint Sino-British treaties on Hong Kong's handover, the territory is promised autonomy for the next 50 years, except in areas of foreign affairs and defence.
British Governor Chris Patten, who will be replaced by Tung from July 1, declared over local radio on Sunday Beijing simply did not trust Hong Kong to run itself sensibly and responsibly.
"The decision seems to be based on their wish to have a tighter control over life here. They don't -- they should, but they don't -- yet trust Hong Kong," Patten said.
While Tung has invited public comments on the planned curbs until the end of April, many are sceptical.
Demonstrators at Sunday's march slammed the consultation as fake. "No to fake consultation", their brightly-coloured placards screamed, while activists pleaded with the media to broadcast to the world what they said was Hong Kong's plight.
Amid controversy over planned law changes which has damaged Tung's popularity ratings, he was also caught last week in the middle of a brewing political funding scandal.
The shipping tycoon caused shock waves on Friday when he said he had made a 50,000 sterling ($81,500) donation to Britain's Conservative Party before the April 1992 general elections.
The disclosure, made just days after he said he would curb foreign funding, had critics accusing him of hypocrisy and double standards.
Tung was further embarrassed the very same day when his political opponent and leader of Hong Kong's democracy movement, Martin Lee, met U.S. President Bill Clinton at the White House.
From the meeting on Friday, Lee won an assurance that Hong Kong was important to the United States and a warning from Clinton to China to abide by Sino-British treaties under which Hong Kong is promised a high level of self rule for 50 years.
"A winner in Washington," the headline of an editorial in Sunday Morning Post said in tribute to Lee.
Tung, who cancelled a pre-handover visit to the United States in midweek, saying he was too busy, has come across the poorer, the newspaper said.
"The spectacular success of the Martin Lee visit sits in stark contrast to what has become the non-visit of Tung Chee-hwa," the editorial said.
