Democracy leader Martin Lee returned on Monday from a foreign tour highlighted by talks with U.S. President Bill Clinton and convinced Hong Kong has friends anxious to preserve its freedoms after China takes over.
The head of the Hong Kong Democratic Party met Clinton at the White House and won a promise of U.S. support after the British colony is handed back to China on July 1.
Analysts contrasted Lee's tour of the United States, Canada and Switzerland with the recent falling popularity poll ratings suffered by the territory's future leader, Tung Chee-hwa, who last week called off his own U.S. tour amid a wave of criticism of proposed plans to curb civil liberties after the handover.
Tung, who will govern from July 1, was criticised by the United States, Britain and Hong Kong's pro-democracy camp for plans to ban foreign funding and curb protests.
He caused another stir when he admitted donating 50,000 sterling (US$81,500) to Britain's Conservative Party in 1992.
"Lee has made quite a victory. Quite apart from what he achieved from his tour, he subjected himself to scrutiny by groups of people," said law professor and political analyst Nihal Jayawickrama of the University of Hong Kong.
"While that was happening, we had Mr Tung saying he was disappointed with Lee and the exposure for his own activities which has affected his credibility quite considerably."
Jubilant after his hectic month-long 12-city lobbying tour, Lee said he was convinced Hong Kong had friends worldwide who wanted to preserve its freedoms after China takes over.
Lee said governments in the West had a moral responsibility to see that China abides by its treaty pledge of allowing Hong Kong's freewheeling lifestyle to endure for another 50 years.
"We're not fighting alone for human rights and democracy in Hong Kong. We have many friends in Australia, New Zealand, Canada, the United States and Europe," he said.
Hong Kong, a British colony for more than 150 years, reverts to Chinese rule at midnight on June 30 under a 1984 treaty.
Many in the bustling territory of 6.4 million fear a loss of fundamental freedoms after the handover, now just 71 days away.
Apart from the latest threat of curbs on freedom, China plans to replace Hong Kong's elected legislature with one carefully crafted by Beijing.
"We reminded the U.S. government and all other governments that supported the Joint Declaration they owe Hong Kong a moral responsibility to make sure the rule of law, civil liberties are preserved after the sovereignty changeover," Lee said.
Lee, whose return coincided with the arrival of a small advance party of Chinese soldiers to prepare for the rest of the garrison on July 1, said he did not think it was necessary to have Chinese troops in Hong Kong.
"The stationing of troops in Shenzhen would have been sufficient to protect Hong Kong if necessary," he said.
"The British garrison was stationed here for an obvious reason, that is in case there was an invasion from a certain direction. But when Hong Kong is part of China there is no question of Hong Kong facing such a threat," he said.
Lee said he was deeply worried about the impact of Tung's planned curbs on protests and the ban on overseas fund-raising.
"If Mr Tung stops us, and it becomes law, we will have to decide what to do," he said. His party raised HK$2.5 million (US$323,000) from Chinese communities in its month-long tour.
(US$1 = HK$7.73)
