Hong Kong's democracy movement leader Martin Lee made a triumphant return to the territory on Monday after upstaging future leader Tung Chee-hwa by winning support from Washington for political freedoms.
The head of the Hong Kong Democratic Party became a media star in the United States where he clinched a White House meeting with President Bill Clinton, who promised U.S. support after the British colony reverts to Chinese rule on July 1.
Jubilant and relaxed after a hectic month-long, 12-city tour to the United States, Canada and Switzerland, Lee said he was convinced Hong Kong had friends throughout the world who were anxious to preserve its freedoms after China takes over.
Lee said governments in the West had a moral responsibility to see that China abides by its treaty pledge of allowing Hong Kong's freewheeling lifestyle to endure for another 50 years.
Hong Kong, a British colony for more than 150 years, reverts to Chinese rule at midnight June 30 under a 1984 treaty.
The Sino-British Joint Declaration on Hong Kong's handover promises the territory quasi autonomy in all areas except defence and foreign affairs.
But many in the bustling territory of 6.4 million fear a loss of fundamental freedoms after the handover, now just 71 days away.
The territory is plagued by a host of handover woes ranging from China's plan to replace the elected legislature with one carefully crafted by Beijing, to curbs on protests and a ban on foreign funding for political groups.
Lee, whose return coincided with the arrival of an advance party of China's army to prepare for the coming of the rest of the garrison on July 1, told Hong Kong people to take heart.
"We're not fighting alone for human rights and democracy in Hong Kong. We have many friends in Australia, New Zealand, Canada, the United States and Europe," he said.
"People are very concerned about Hong Kong and preservation of its freedoms as guaranteed by the Joint Declaration.
"We reminded the U.S. government and all other governments that supported the Joint Declaration...they owe Hong Kong at least a moral responsibility to make sure the rule of law, civil liberties are preserved after the sovereignty changeover."
Last week at the White House, Lee won an assurance that Hong Kong was important to the United States and a warning from Clinton to China to abide by its Joint Declaration commitments.
Lee's return, after scoring his political victory in Washington, provided a counterpoint to the falling popularity of future leader Tung, who will govern Hong Kong from July 1.
Sharply criticised for his plans to ban foreign funding of political groups and curb protests, Tung found himself the subject of a scandal after he admitted having donated 50,000 sterling (US$81,500) to Britain's Conservative Party in 1992.
Lee vowed he and his party members would not give up their fight to preserve Hong Kong's freedoms, but he admitted he was deeply worried that Tung would press ahead with his plans.
"If Mr Tung stops us, and (the plans) become law, we will have to decide what to do," he said.
Lee's party raised HK$2.5 million (US$323,000) from Chinese communities during its month-long tour. (US$1 = HK$7.73)
