The United States on Friday said it would grant 10-year multiple-entry visas to holders of Hong Kong passports issued after China takes back the territory, clearing a major worry here about travel rights.
U.S. Consul-General Richard Boucher said holders of future Hong Kong passports would get the same visa treatment now enjoyed by holders of Hong Kong British travel documents.
"We intend to issue maximum validity visas for the United States for people with the new Hong Kong Special Administrative Region (SAR) passport," Boucher told reporters.
The decision was a milestone in international recognition of the future SAR passport and removed a question mark hanging over Hong Kong as China prepares to resume sovereignty at midnight on June 30, ending 156 years of British colonial rule.
From July 1, the territory of 6.4 million people will become a Special Administrative Region of China, and winning easy travel access to major destinations is viewed as a barometer of confidence in the territory's future prospects.
Easy travel rights are also seen as key to maintaining Hong Kong's position as an international business and tourism centre.
So far, nine countries -- Britain, Singapore, Canada, the Philippines, Western Samoa, Trinidad and Tobago, Namibia, Benin, and San Marino -- have gone further to grant full visa-free entry for SAR passports, but other nations have hesitated.
Japan, for example, has said it will treat SAR passports more favourably than Chinese passports, but it has not yet revealed details.
Boucher said the same visa application procedures and conditions for approval as now would apply after the handover for Hong Kong people wishing to visit the United States.
"The same application procedures, the same forms, the same facilities will apply...the requirements are exactly the same. The decisions on yes or no are exactly the same," he said.
Hong Kong Director of Immigration Regina Ip welcomed Washington's decision and saw it as a confidence booster.
"Absolutely, this will be a very useful confidence booster. So far, nine countries will give visa-free treatment to Hong Kong SAR passports...a few more are considering and we will probably have a lot more before July 1," she said.
In return, U.S. citizens would be accorded the same visa-free entry privilege which they now enjoy, she said.
"Current arrangements are that they may do so without a visa for visits up to one month. The Hong Kong government has no plans to change the current practice," Ip said.
While the status of Hong Kong people travelling to the United States after July 1 has become clearer, questions still hang over locals with U.S. passports but who want to hold on to their Hong Kong permanent residency.
China, which does not recognise dual nationality, has said ethnic Chinese Hong Kong residents will be regarded as Chinese nationals with no right to foreign consular protection unless they declare their foreign citizenship.
Boucher indicated that Hong Kong residents with U.S. passports should make use of them when crossing borders to make clear their citizenship.
"An American citizen is an American citizen and we will endeavour to assist (them) whenever they need assistance.
"By taking advantage of their passports, it's easier for both sides to understand who is regarded an American and how we can protect them," Boucher said.
Separately, U.S. Ambassader to Beijing James Sasser told a business lunch in Hong Kong that Washington would keep a keen eye on the territory after the handover.
"Americans have invested $15 billion here. To sustain this U.S. presence requires a society governed by the rule of law and protection of basic freedom," he said.
