Hong Kong's luxury property market, which has taken a beating since March, looks set to consolidate before making a recovery in the third quarter of 1997, property experts and developers said on Tuesday.
"Over the next two to three months, the market will consolidate barring no further political and economic factors, and we're unlikely to see another dramatic drop," said Peter Lee, chairman for Asia with Jones Lang Wootton (JLW).
"There may be a little softness in the next two months, but once that is through, we may see a recovery at the end of the third quarter," said Charles Wheatman, Pacific director at JLW.
Prices of all types of flats have tumbled by around 10 percent since March, when the government bowed to public anger and took steps to curb sky-high prices.
Flats can now be pre-sold 15 months before completion, up from 12 months, and developers must offer them in batches of no less than 20 percent of the total number available.
At around the same time, banks put up prime lending rates by 25 basis points to 8.75 percent, further ripping the bubble enveloping the property market.
Within days, property brokers complained of transactions thinning out, buyers reneging on deals and prices falling as the market turned sharply in favour of buyers.
The effect was keenly felt in the luxury flat market, where speculation had been especially rife and dominated by "confirmers", or traders who buy a property and then resell it before assignment procedures are completed.
Prices of flats in flashy and expensive districts have fallen by at least 10 percent as confirmers now need to cut prices to move their holdings, experts said.
"Sellers have to bring prices down by at least 10 percent to get the deal done," Lee said.
But the market will head towards better times once these speculators are flushed out, Lee said.
"Confirmers who need to get rid of what's in hand need to complete their transactions within the next six weeks and two months. After that, prices will consolidate," he told Reuters.
But Sun Hung Kai Properties Ltd, which is selling only two flats in its luxury 42-unit development on Repulse Bay Road in a coming tender, does not think the units will be affected by the recent price downturn.
"This is an exclusive project, it will not be affected. We're confident we can get a reasonably good price," said Victor Lui, property investment manager at Sun Hung Kai.
Lui said it was the original plan of the company to keep the majority of units at the development for lease, and he would not disclose whether any more will be sold at a later date.
The 2,021-square-foot units are out for tender at a base price of HK$18,800 per square foot. The tender closes on May 13.
-- Hong Kong newsroom (852) 2843 6441
