Crucial talks between Hong Kong and Taiwan on how to continue direct shipping links after the British-ruled territory reverts to China foundered on Friday when the two sides hit an impasse over which flags to fly.
The one-day talks, aimed at resolving sensitive details of shipping protocol, hit a major snag when the two sides failed to agree on which flags ships should fly when plying routes between Hong Kong and Taiwan, the Taiwanese representative said.
"The obstacle is the flag. This is a contentious issue," deputy secretary-general Chang Liang-jen of the semi-official Straits Exchange Foundation said at a news conference.
"It's a very complicated matter and a difficult one to settle just in one meeting," Chang said at the end of the talks.
Ships registered in Hong Kong and Taiwan currently follow the international practice of flying each other's flag when entering the other's territorial waters.
But this practice must be abandoned after Britain hands back Hong Kong to China on July 1, as the territory's post-handover constitution has a clause saying it must observe the "one-China" principle.
Communist-ruled China has viewed Taiwan as a rebel province since the Nationalist government fled to the island after losing a Chinese civil war in 1949. Beijing fiercely opposes any symbol or gesture of Taiwan independence.
As a result, Hong Kong ships will not be allowed to fly the Taiwan flag.
Taipei wants Taiwan and Hong Kong ships to lower all flags and identify themselves by telex before entering each other's waters, but Hong Kong is against the idea.
"Every ship in the world has to fly a flag according to international maritime laws. Only a pirate's ship is without a flag," said George Chao, head of the Hong Kong Shipowners' Association.
Chao, who held a separate news conference after Chang left, admitted he was constrained by guidelines given by China.
"Beijing has given me the 'one-China' principle within which to operate," he said, adding that although the meeting had not nailed down an agreement, it had ruled out some options.
"Both sides have agreed the Chinese flag and the Taiwanese flag will not be flown," he said.
But he refused to say whether Hong Kong's future flag, depicting the tropical bauhinia flower, or Taiwan's unofficial plum blossom flag used in international sport gatherings and other events were options under consideration.
"Until we agree, I will not disclose our plan," he said.
China, which has kept conspicuously silent on the issue, is keenly interested and monitoring it closely.
A China-backed Hong Kong newspaper said on Friday that the continuation of shipping links between Hong Kong and Taiwan after July 1 must abide by the "one-China" principle.
"Carrying the Taiwan national flag is in conflict with the one-China policy," Wen Wei Pao said.
But the newspaper offered a solution.
"The problem was solved for air traffic when China Airlines replaced the Taiwan flag on its logo with the plum blossom. It should not be too hard for sea traffic to do something similar," it said.
Chao said he was confident a decision would be reached before July 1. The two sides will hold their second meeting in Taipei, probably in two weeks' time, he added.
