Hong Kong and Taiwan shipping representatives sat down on Friday to discuss how to continue direct shipping links after British-ruled Hong Kong reverts to Chinese rule in two months' time.
George Chao, head of the Hong Kong Shipowners' Association, said sensitive details of protocol needed to be resolved before direct shipping links could continue when Hong Kong returns to China on July 1.
Top of the agenda was the issue of which flag ships should fly, he told Taiwan delegates at the start of the meeting.
"After July 1 this year, shipping between Taiwan and Hong Kong faces some questions, for example on flags," Chao said.
"These need to be adjusted so that normal shipping links between both places can continue."
Ships registered in Hong Kong and Taiwan currently follow the international practice of flying each other's flag when entering the other's territorial waters.
But this practice will be abandoned from the sovereignty handover on July 1 because Hong Kong's future constitution has a clause that it must observe the "one-China" principle.
Communist-ruled China has viewed Taiwan as a rebel province since the Nationalist government fled to the island after losing the Chinese civil war on the mainland in 1949.
Beijing fiercely opposes any symbol or gesture of Taiwan independence.
Chang Liang-jen, deputy secretary-general of the semi-official Straits Exchange Foundation, said he preferred to keep the status quo in shipping links with Hong Kong and would like to make as few changes as possible.
Taipei has proposed that both Taiwan and Hong Kong ships lower all flags and identify themselves through telex communications before entering each other's waters.
Chao held out hope of an amicable solution.
"Both sides are optimistic and hope we can solve the matter in just one round," he said.
China, which has kept conspicuously silent on the issue, is keenly interested and monitoring it closely.
A China-backed Hong Kong newspaper said on Friday that the continuation of shipping links between Hong Kong and Taiwan after July 1 must abide by the "one-China" principle.
"Carrying the Taiwan national flag is in conflict with the one-China policy," the daily Wen Wei Pao warned.
The newspaper, however, offered a solution.
"The problem was solved for air traffic when China Airlines replaced the Taiwan flag on its logo with the plum blossom. It should not be too hard for sea traffic to do similarly," it said.
A Taiwan ship sailed to China last month under an agreement with Beijing for limited direct trips via an "offshore transshipment centre". No cargoes are allowed directly to pass from one country to the other.
China has guaranteed Hong Kong a wide degree of autonomy for 50 years after the handover.
