Hong Kong activists on Tuesday denounced Japanese nationalists who staged a landing on Japanese administered islands that are also claimed by China and Taiwan.
More than a dozen activists staged a noisy protest outside Japan's consulate in Hong Kong's stockbroker district to condemn the landing on the islands as a revival of Japanese militarism.
They also demanded that Tokyo apologise for its war crimes in World War Two, when Japan occupied large parts of China as well as Hong Kong.
The latest flare-up over the disputed isles, called the Senkakus in Japan and Diaoyus in China, was triggered by a Japanese nationalist legislator.
Shingo Nishimura, a member of Japan's main opposition New Frontier Party, together with Okinawa politician Hitoshi Nakama and two other people held a brief ceremony on one of the islands on Tuesday.
Cheung Man-kwong, a member of the Action Committee for Protection of the Diaoyu Islands in Hong Kong, said he was incensed by the landing and threatened to take further action.
"Of course we are very angry. Very clearly, they are trying to invade the Diaoyus which belong to China," Cheung said.
"I will discuss with my group and we will take some action," Cheung, an elected pro-democracy legislator, told Reuters.
Albert Ho, chairman of the Action Committee, described the landing attempt as an act of aggression and provocation against China. He said it made the group more determined to carry out plans to sail to the isles from Taiwan on May 18.
Hong Kong activists said last week they would launch the landing attempt with Taiwanese activists, but the Japanese Foreign Ministry said on Tuesday the government would repel any future attempts to land on the islands.
The decades-old dispute exploded into fiery anti-Japanese protests in Hong Kong, Taiwan and Chinese communities elsewhere last year after ultra-rightists in Japan built a makeshift lighthouse on one of the islands in July.
Tuesday's incident threatens to rekindle the Diaoyu protest movement, less than two months before the British colony of Hong Kong is returned to China, at midnight on June 30.
Last September tens of thousands of people turned out to mourn a Hong Kong activist who drowned after jumping into stormy waters near the islands to press China's claim.
