As speculation mounted in Hong Kong about a possible link between Hong Kong Telecommunications Ltd and a Chinese partner, the Hong Kong utility chose to keep mum on Thursday about its future shareholding structure.
"Today is not the time, the place to say specifically what will be done," deputy chairman Richard Brown told a news conference. "There are rumours covered in the press and we don't comment on them".
In the run-up to July 1, when the British colony of Hong Kong will revert to Chinese rule, markets have been awash with rumours of state Chinese enterprises preparing to buy their way into the Hong Kong telecommunications giant.
Hongkong Telecom is 58.5 percent-owned by Cable &amp; Wireless Plc but analysts said both companies may see the wisdom in taking on a mainland partner because of the handover.
However top officials at the Hongkong Telecom news conference, where the company reported a 12.5 percent rise in net profit for the year to March 31 to HK$11.18 ($1.44) billion, declined to answer reporters' questions on the issue.
China's Ministry of Post and Telecommunications (MPT) and China United Telecommunications Corp (China Unicom) have been consistently pinpointed by the local press as likely partners.
A China Unicom official told reporters on Wednesday the company was interested in buying a stake in Hongkong Telecom.
China Unicom is a joint venture of 16 major Chinese organisations, led by the ministries of power, railways and electronics industry.
Brown told reporters there were scores of companies which were interested in partnering Hongkong Telecom, but the company would only reveal details when something was firm.
A seasoned China observer said it was a foregone conclusion that Hongkong Telecom, like all other crucial infrastructure giants in the territory, will see an injection of Chinese interest, whichever state enterprise that came from.
"It's a positive and logical step. It opens scope for more cooperation with the mainland. Big state enterprises will want some kind of say in Hong Kong, after all these years," the observer said.
Powerful Chinese enterprises like CITIC Pacific have claimed large chunks of the territory's air carrier Cathay Pacific Ltd and utility China Light and Power, while China National Aviation Corp bought nearly 36 percent of Hong Kong Dragon Airlines Ltd last year.
An analyst with a foreign research firm, who declined to be named, said some investors viewed positively talk of a Unicom stake in Hong Kong Telecom. But he noted that Unicom had problems of its own.
"It is struggling with MPT and has so far nothing much apart from a mobile business in China," he said.
"Unicom has a host of shareholders from many different ministries and this could be a negative thing because all of them have different, conflicting views."
Shares in Hong Kong Telecom rose to their highest level in almost a year on Thursday, gaining HK$0.80 to close at HK$15.00.
--HONG KONG NEWSROOM (852) 28436441 ($ = 7.745 Hong Kong Dollars)
