Chinese banking giant the Bank of China Group in Hong Kong and Macau (BOC) will not seek special treatment in Hong Kong after the territory reverts to Chinese rule on July 1, a senior official said on Friday.
"We seek no privileges after 1997...it is not our intention to replace any bank in the territory," said Clarina Man, a deputy general manager in the bank's public relations division.
"We will just compete on a level-playing field, on an equal footing and after July 1, business in Hong Kong will be the same as before," she told Reuters in an interview.
Hong Kong, a British colony for more than 150 years, reverts to China at midnight on June 30.
In the 1984 Sino-British treaty governing the handover, China pledged Hong Kong a considerable degree of self-rule and complete fiscal independence under a "one country, two systems" formula espoused by China's late paramount leader Deng Xiaoping.
But many Hong Kong people are concerned about the possible emergence of cronyism and meddling by Chinese officials and companies in Hong Kong affairs and that Beijing, however well-meaning, might be unable to control that.
Man said BOC was acutely aware of such concerns and was particularly sensitive that it must vigilantly observe the "one country, two systems" formula, and be seen doing so.
"We are very sensitive and mindful of the 'one China, two systems' formula...foreign and local banks will be treated equally (after the handover)," she said.
BOC, which groups 13 sister banks, boasts of a quarter of the total banking deposits in Hong Kong and a fifth of total Hong Kong dollar loans in the territory.
In the fiscal year ended December 31, 1996, the bank reported a year-on-year 20.5 percent rise in global pre-tax profit, and a net profit of 11.6 billion yuan (US$1.4 billion).
Worldwide, the bank has assets of around HK$2,450 billion (US$316.9 billion), half of which are held overseas.
BOC started operations in Hong Kong in 1917 and experienced tremendous growth from the late 1970s when China opened its doors and moved towards a market-oriented economy, Man said.
From 1978 to 1996, BOC saw its total deposits jump 4,470 percent and total loans 7,240 percent, well ahead of the average rise of 3,420 percent and 4,090 percent enjoyed by other banks.
Hong Kong's second largest banking group, BOC helped steady the territory's markets through extension of a credit line during the global stock market crash in 1987 and lent a strong hand during the Mexican financial crisis in 1995.
Man, who is also a BOC economist, said she thought a run on the Hong Kong dollar was most unlikely around the time of the handover. Even in the event of a crisis, Hong Kong had more than enough reserves to pull through.
She was, however, guarded when asked if BOC would lend Hong Kong a hand, as it has many times before.
"Basically, we're a commercial company, it's not our responsibility to stabilise the financial markets."
"We just do it from our point of view that we are a major commercial bank in Hong Kong. And that to stabilise Hong Kong's financial market is also in our interest," she said. "We're all in the same boat. If it rolls over, we fall in too."
In Hong Kong, BOC plans to expand electronic banking facilities to give more value to its retail banking business, and expand its merchant banking capabilities, Man said.
"This year, 38 mainland companies have been approved for listing overseas, they are waiting to be arranged," Man said, adding that BOC was keen to offer services to these companies. (US$1 = 8.3 yuan = HK$7.73)
-- Hong Kong newsroom, (852) 2843-6441
