China-controlled China Everbright Holdings Co Ltd emerged from out of the blue on Friday as the new China link for HongKong Telecommunications Ltd, analysts said.
Months of suspense were ended earlier when Hong Kong-based conglomerate CITIC Pacific Ltd said it would sell its 7.74 percent stake in Hongkong Telecom to China Everbright, a holding company controlled by China's State Council.
"It's not surprising that they will want a minority stake in a large strategic asset like Hongkong Telecom," said Andrew Fernow, director of research at Vickers Ballas.
But analysts were at a loss to say what China Everbright could bring to Hongkong Telecom.
"The biggest question is what edge could China Everbright possibly offer to Hongkong Telecom?" a China analyst at a European firm said. "It's like a snake swallowing an elephant."
China Everbright Holdings has three listed subsidiaries in Hong Kong -- China Everbright International Ltd, China Everbright Technology Ltd and China Everbright-IHD Pacific Ltd.
It is one of 16 equal shareholders in China United Telecommunications Corp (China Unicom), China's second largest telecommunications provider after the powerful Ministry of Post and Telecommunications (MPT).
Unicom, set up in July 1994 at a total cost of 1.28 billion yuan (or 80 million yuan from each of its 16 partners), provides basic and long-distance telecommunications services, as well as mobile and paging facilities in China.
In recent weeks, both Unicom and MPT have been widely tipped as possible China partners of Hongkong Telecom, which as a foreign company is prevented from direct participating in China's telecom market.
But Unicom is known to be troubled by a host of problems, ranging from a lack of cash to its well-known friction with MPT. "Unicom has no money to buy into Hongkong Telecom now," an analyst with another European firm said. "As China Everbright is one of the shareholders in Unicom, it could be buying it first, and Unicom could come into the picture later."
But while China Everbright had little in terms of assets to bring, it did have the connections in China, one analyst noted.
Zhu Xiaohua, known to be a close associate of China's economic tsar Zhu Rongji, is the chairman of China Everbright.
He had been deputy governor of the People's Bank of China and the deputy director of the economics department at the Hong Kong branch of Xinhua news agency prior to joining the China Everbright group in July 1996.
In China, however, there was at least one party keenly watching the developments that snowballed in Hong Kong.
A Unicom source said the company was watching developments but refused to disclose further details.
"Ask Everbright, or CITIC," the Unicom source said.
-- Hong Kong newsroom (852) 2843 6441
