Hong Kong's future lawmakers drew howls of protest from the pro-democracy camp on Saturday after they supported Beijing-backed plans to dilute civil liberties in the territory when it returns to China at midnight on June 30.
The democratic camp also accused the future lawmakers of the provisional legislature of selling out the people of Hong Kong by merely doing Beijing's bidding.
"This group, anyway, was not popularly elected, what Beijing wants, it will pass. This is a foregone conclusion," said Tsang Kin-shing, a legislator of Hong Kong's current elected chamber and a member of the popular Democratic Party.
"They are just doing it for their own advantage, I don't have any hope in them. They are just selling out on Hong Kong people," he told Reuters by telephone.
The outcry follows a meeting of the provisional legislature across the border in China's Shenzhen city earlier on Saturday, where members gave their backing to plans by Hong Kong's future leader, Tung Chee-hwa, to place curbs on freedoms from July 1.
The plans include requiring police permits for political protests and a ban on foreign funding of political groups. They have sparked protests from Hong Kong's lawyers and human rights activists, as well as from Britain and the United States.
But the curbs, Tung argues, are necessary to preserve social order in Hong Kong, which will return to China on July 1 when more than 150 years of British colonial rule comes to an end.
Tung's plans were widely expected after Beijing resolved in February to repeal or amend existing Hong Kong laws protecting freedoms and political rights.
The 60-member interim chamber, which was selected in December under rules crafted by China, agreed with the broad principles of the planned curbs, which have yet to be drafted.
"Hong Kong's situation is sensitive, as at any time, but now especially Hong Kong people must be on the alert for the possibility of the region being infiltrated by hostile elements," said provisional legislator Elsie Tu.
"It is our responsibility to maintain public order and prevent interference by outside political parties."
Some, however, said the curbs must be reasonable and not restrict freedoms as Hong Kong people were usually law-abiding while others urged clearer definitions of some concepts in the proposed curbs to allay fears in Hong Kong.
Tung has cited concepts such as "national security" as a basis for the planned curbs, but critics have criticised the idea as both alarmist and groundless.
The planned curbs are widely expected to go through legislative procedures before the handover and be confirmed and made into Hong Kong laws on July 1 by the interim chamber.
The China-backed provisional legislature has held its meetings in China rather than Hong Kong to protect itself from legal challenges by members of the elected chamber.
China, angered by democratic reforms introduced by the last British governor, Chris Patten, has said it will disband the elected legislature and install the provisional body as Hong Kong's official lawmaking assembly after July 1.
The future chamber also prepared to make its first law for Hong Kong on Saturday. A bill, covering public holidays for 1997 and 1998, passed through all three readings and will be confirmed as law on July 1, the local cable TV station reported.
Andrew Cheng, a current legislator and Democratic Party member denounced the passage of the bill.
"The provisional legislature is an unconstitutional structure and they don't have any legal foundation to pass laws for Hong Kong," Cheng said on Radio Television Hong Kong.
