Hong Kong's future leader Tung Chee-hwa will unveil on Thursday revised plans to curb civil liberties and rights in the territory after it reverts to China at midnight on June 30, a spokesman from Tung's office said on Wednesday.
The original proposals, announced in early April, restrict demonstrations and ban overseas funding of political parties. They have been revised after Tung launched a three-week consultation exercise seeking views from the public.
"The proposals have been revised after the consultation, considering what people said," the spokesman told Reuters.
"We will have a compendium of the thousands of submissions...what sort of responses there were," he said.
The revised plans will be announced on Thursday by Michael Suen, a top civil servant recently seconded to Tung's office, and are expected to be made into post-handover Hong Kong laws by the China-backed provisional legislature.
The interim chamber, under China's plans, will itself replace Hong Kong's current elected legislature on July 1.
Tung's plans had long been expected after China's parliament, the National People's Congress, endorsed in February a proposal to change or drop some laws protecting civil rights in Hong Kong.
Tung, the territory's chief executive-designate, argues the intended changes are mere technicalities, needed to strike a balance between freedoms and social order.
But they have drawn a groundswell of opposition from Hong Kong's pro-democracy camp as well as strong criticism from Britain, the United States and human rights groups.
Tung's revised plans were preceded on Wednesday by a fierce debate in Hong Kong's legislative council, with prominent lawmakers condemning the controversial plans.
Independent legislator Christine Loh said Tung had given no basis for his intended changes to current laws that have worked well for Hong Kong.
"The proposals are an invitation to political self-censorship and predictably have a serious, heinous effect on participation in public affairs and an assault on the international character and public spirit of Hong Kong civil society," she said.
But a motion, put forward by Democratic Party legislator Cheung Man-kwong, expressing deep regret over the proposals, was rejected by a vote of 27 against 23.
Legislator Ngai Shiu-kit and a member of the pro-business Labour Party argued the proposed changes were necessary.
"Some people have behaved themselves in such a manner in public that have given rise to some alarm," he said, referring to a protest last year when a group of Hong Kong activists stormed into the Japanese consulate in a row over disputed islands in the East China Sea, which are claimed by China, Japan and Taiwan.
"If a society is manipulated by such people, then Hong Kong will be embarking on a very dangerous path and that would not be in the overall interest of the community," he said.
