Hong Kong's future government on Thursday made some minor changes to planned civil rights curbs in the territory after it reverts to China on July 1, but stuck to its guns on the need to roll back British reforms.
Michael Suen, an aide to leader-in-waiting Tung Chee-hwa, unveiled a diluted version of curbs on protests and a modified ban on foreign funding of local political groups.
Suen told a news conference the key concept of "national security", which forms the basis for many of the curbs, would not be fixed formally until a meeting of the China-backed interim legislature on Saturday.
However, he said: "National Security will be defined as the safeguarding of territorial integrity and the independence of the People's Republic of China."
The inclusion of the "national security" concept in Hong Kong's post-handover laws is widely expected to outlaw any protests advocating independence for Taiwan or Tibet, both of which China regards as rightfully its territory.
Suen said changes were made to the curbs after digesting views canvassed during a three-week public consultation exercise that was marked by strong opposition from the pro-democracy camp to any rollback of political freedoms and rights.
"We have listened carefully to public opinions on the consultation document and have taken positive steps to address the concerns expressed," Suen, a top civil servant who was recently seconded to Tung's office, told reporters.
Local political parties would now be barred only from taking donations from foreign political groups, he said.
Under Tung's original plan announced in early April, the ban extended to all foreign organisations and individuals.
Although donations from foreign political organisations would be banned, Suen said, contributions from mainland China were acceptable.
"Some people will like to include organisations in China, but the Chief Executive (Tung) has repeatedly stressed that Hong Kong will be part of China from July 1," he said.
"If we were to include China as a foreign country, it would be farfetched," he said. Accepting donations from political groups in Taiwan, however, would be illegal.
Curbs on protest marches have been slightly relaxed. The original plan required notification to the police not less than seven days before a protest, with discretion for the police to accept late notification up to two days beforehand.
"But having considered all views expressed on this subject, the Executive Council of the (future) government has decided to cancel this particular suggestion...the proposed minimum notice of 48 hours will be removed," Suen said.
Tung's planned curbs were originally proposed after China's parliament endorsed in February a proposal to change or drop reforms of civil liberties ennacted by the outgoing British colonial administration.
Tung has argued the changes are mere technicalities, needed to strike a balance between freedoms and social order and to guard against interference by foreign forces in local politics.
Hong Kong's popular Democratic Party attacked Tung for paying mere lip service to the consultation exercise.
"They (Tung's administration) have not given way at all. Larger principles have not changed," said party vice-chairman and elected legislator Yeung Sum.
"What we can see is his loyalty to what China wants," said Albert Ho, a legislator and party member.
The provisional legislature, which meets across the Hong Kong border in Shenzhen on Saturday, will replace the territory's elected legislature on July 1.
