A second wave of Chinese soldiers arrived in Hong Kong on Monday to prepare garrison facilities before Beijing takes back the territory from Britain on July 1.
Sixty-six uniformed but unarmed soldiers of the People's Liberation Army (PLA) drove into Hong Kong in a fleet of 14 staff vehicles from the Chinese border city of Shenzhen.
Monday's group was the second PLA contingent in as many months to arrive in the territory under arrangements worked out by the Sino-British Joint Liaison Group overseeing details of Hong Kong's sovereignty change.
Forty soldiers entered on April 21 to prepare logistics and facilities before the eventual arrival on July 1 of the rest of the Chinese troops to be stationed in the territory.
Major-General Liu Zhenwu, commander of the future garrison in Hong Kong, officiated a solemn send-off ceremony on the Chinese side of the border, according to the official Chinese Xinhua news agency.
Liu urged the advance party "to carry on the fine traditions of the PLA, and to perform the sacred duties entrusted to them by the country and people".
A handful of British soldiers and Chinese officers from the first advance group greeted the latest contingent on the Hong Kong side in a brief and low-key ceremony.
Sporting dark blue berets and crisply-starched uniforms, the 66 PLA troops crossed over at 1.00 p.m. (0500 GMT) in a convoy comprising a large air-conditioned bus, green army trucks, jeeps and black Audi cars.
Hong Kong, a British colony for more than 150 years, reverts to China on July 1 and the British garrison is already packing up ahead of its departure at midnight June 30.
From July 1, the bustling capitalist city of 6.4 million will be guarded by the PLA.
After the brief greetings, the British soldiers then climbed aboard the Chinese vehicles to help give directions to the Sek Kong military camp in the New Territories.
Besides Sek Kong, the latest group will be stationed in the Prince of Wales Barracks, Stonecutters Island and Gun Club Hill Barracks, a Hong Kong government spokesman said.
A third and final advance guard of 90 soliders is scheduled to arrive on May 30, bringing the total preparatory force of Chinese troops in Hong Kong to 196 before the handover.
Many Hong Kong people are concerned about the presence of PLA troops in the territory because of the bloody military crackdown on activists in Beijing's Tiananmen Square in 1989.
China plans to station some 10,000 troops in the territory after the handover, about the same number as the British garrison at its peak.
But the Chinese officers have been careful to make sure that the troops who have already arrived are keeping a low profile.
