Hong Kong's government and business community on Tuesday welcomed U.S. President Bill Clinton's decision to renew China's trade privileges and said they hoped the U.S. Congress would not strike down the move.
The extension of China's Most Favoured Nation (MFN) trading status was particularly important to Hong Kong, now preparing for its return to Chinese rule on July 1, they said.
"The chamber is very happy," Erica Ng, assistant manager of international affairs at the Hong Kong General Chamber of Commerce said. "Every year, we carry out lobbying activities to persuade the U.S. government to renew China's MFN."
"We welcome the decision. However we would say at this stage it is still to receive the endorsement by Congress. There is a long way to go," Christopher Hammerbeck, executive director of the British Chamber of Commerce in Hong Kong, told Reuters.
The Hong Kong government also welcomed Clinton's move and said it would continue to lobby and remind the U.S. congress of the importance of China's trade privileges to Hong Kong.
"We are grateful to know that the President has taken Hong Kong's interests into account", Secretary for Trade and Industry Denise Yue said in a statement.
"We will continue with our lobbying efforts and keep Congress informed of Hong Kong's position, so as to enable Congress to take our interests into account when it deliberates on the matter," Yue said.
Clinton on Monday announced his decision to renew China's MFN status for another year, but the move is expected to face fierce opposition from Congress.
Social conservatives, organised labour and other opponents are preparing for a fight, pointing to China's policies on human and religious rights, trade and other issues.
Many in Congress were wary of China's plans to curb some freedoms in Hong Kong after the handover, Frank Martin, president of the American Chamber of Commerce (AmCham) in Hong Kong, told government radio.
Martin was in Washington last week as part of an AmCham delegation lobbying for a renewal of China's MFN status.
"Others mentioned the allegations of China's involvement in election campaign fundraising (in the United States). The trade deficit is a perennial problem -- it is neither economically nor politically sustainable," he said.
Hong Kong's business community said U.S. Congress members should bear in mind the importance of China's trade status to Hong Kong.
"Hong Kong could lose very much in re-export trade," Ng said. "We hope that Congress can understand that it is a critical year for Hong Kong because of the handover.
The chambers of commerce say Hong Kong could lose up to US$30 billion annually in trade and related industry revenues. Gross domestic product growth could be cut by about three percentage points and some 86,000 jobs in Hong Kong could be lost if China loses its trading privileges.
"We recognise fully not only the vital importance of China but the collateral impact it has on the prosperity of Hong Kong," Hammerbeck of the British business chamber said.
"The membership of this chamber employs not only 300,000 Hong Kong people but we also employ large numbers of Chinese citizens in China."
-- Hong Kong newsroom (852) 2843 6441
