China's late paramount leader Deng Xiaoping did not live to see Hong Kong's return to Beijing rule, but his eldest son Deng Pufang said on Wednesday he was thinking about seeing the July 1 handover.
Deng, 53, said his father, who engineered Hong Kong's return to China under a "one country two systems" policy, would have deeply regretted not having lived to see the change of flag.
The late Deng would also have liked to "take a walk on Hong Kong soil", his son told reporters during a visit to Hong Kong to promote a medical action plan in China.
"I haven't decided whether or not to come" Deng said.
He said he did not think his family members had yet asked Beijing for permission to see the handover.
Deng was in Hong Kong for the launch of a plan to prevent and treat blindness and other eye diseases in the country.
His father died on February 19, aged 92, after almost two decades in power in which he opened China to the world and moved it down the path of reform and the free market.
Deng Pufang, a paraplegic, was hurt in a fall from a window when his father was being persecuted during the 1966-1976 radical leftist Cultural Revolution.
He was candid as he fielded personal questions from reporters, and emotional as he spoke of his father's death.
"He lived to 1997, but he died before the handover. This, I believe is his deep regret. It is a great pity," he said.
He also said his mother and siblings were very moved by the outpouring of grief in Hong Kong when his father died.
"On behalf of my whole family I want to express our gratitude to Hong Kong people for the condolences they gave when my father passed away. We are thankful for the warmth and the highest regards given to my father."
In Hong Kong, the senior Deng is best remembered for his firmness in ending what Chinese people view as a century and a half of "national shame" under British colonial rule and engineering its return to China.
Britain wrenched Hong Kong from China as war spoils in the 19th century Opium Wars and has ruled it for 156 years.
Britain formally agreed to return Hong Kong to China in the Joint Declaration of 1984, under which Hong Kong was guaranteed a high degree of self-rule for 50 years after the handover.
Deng Pufang said his father was confident while he was alive that Hong Kong would continue to prosper after the handover.
"He was very confident that no matter what happened, China will manage Hong Kong well and that Hong Kong people will rule Hong Kong very effectively," he said.
