For many in China, a fabled El Dorado lies at the southern tip of their vast country -- Hong Kong, rich and elusive.
The dream is likely to stay that way after the British-ruled territory reverts to Chinese rule on June 30.
Yang He, a Hong Kong resident for the past 40 years, has waited more than 11 years for his son to get a permit to come from China to join him, his wife and two daughters.
"We applied in 1986 for my son to come to Hong Kong. He has been cared for by his grandparents since he was a baby.
"We had to leave him when he was only 25 days old because he had no permit," Yang, 56, told Reuters in a recent interview.
"Most nights I cannot sleep for just thinking of him."
Yang is not alone in his suffering.
Hong Kong authorities say there are 34,000 children in China waiting to join either one or both parents in Hong Kong, but Chinese authorities say the figure could be higher than 100,000.
CHINESE HEAR OF CITY STREETS PAVED WITH GOLD
In China, rock stars sing patriotic songs welcoming the return of Hong Kong, and television stations beam into Chinese homes documentaries describing the wealthy metropolis, giving an impression of streets lined with opportunities -- and gold.
But most of China's 1.2 billion people will probably never set foot on Hong Kong soil.
Although the British will leave and the Chinese red flag will flutter over the territory, Hong Kong will be separately run under a "one country, two systems" formula espoused by China's late paramount leader Deng Xiaoping.
To stop a flood of mainlanders into the tiny but crowded territory of 6.4 million people, border security is tight -- on both sides of the line.
Hong Kong operates a quota system permitting 150 mainlanders to migrate to Hong Kong each day, 66 of them children.
But it can take years to obtain the precious "one-way permit" -- and many resort to backdoor methods in dispair.
QUOTAS OPEN TO CORRUPTION
China-born Yang said he has totally lost faith in China's bureaucracy and communist system, which he said was so riddled with corruption that only the rich can buy their way out.
"In 1995, when I asked again about the status of my son's application, they (government officials) asked for money. They said they wanted at least HK$130,000 (US$16,800)," Yang said.
"They told me it wasn't them who would take all the money, they have to ask favours from other people, buy cigarettes, drinks, fruit, and there wasn't such a thing as digging from their own pockets to pay my son's passage to Hong Kong."
Yang paid HK$40,000 (US$5,175) and a few gold rings when he applied in 1985 to get his wife and eldest daughter to join him.
They arrived in 1986. But there was no permit for his baby.
"If you have money, you can come, proudly by train, if not, you can't come. If you haven't enough, you come illegally, dangerously by speedboat in the night," he said.
"You don't know the Chinese system, it is so corrupt, it would be best if after the handover, the Hong Kong government takes over the responsibility of approving the applications," said So Ying, a mother who has waited five years for her son and daughter to join her and her husband in Hong Kong.
Some get so frustrated by the wait that they have taken the matter into their own hands, paying between HK$2,000 to HK$4,000 to smugglers -- or "snakeheads" as they are known locally -- to spirit their spouses and children into Hong Kong.
Between January and April 1997, 1,449 young illegal migrants surrendered to authorities against 540 for the whole of 1996.
In the first four months of 1997, 7,406 illegal migrants, including adults, were arrested around border areas, against 23,180 for the whole of 1996.
HONG KONG AUTHORITIES GET TOUGH
In an unusual show of force, Hong Kong immigration officials last month seized eight-year-old Chung Yeuk-lam and her mother from their flat and sent them back to China.
The girl had been carried illegally into Hong Kong by her mother when she was just three months old.
Colonial Governor Chris Patten said it was important not to make exceptions in order to quash rumours spread by snakeheads that there will be an amnesty for illegals after the handover, which the Hong Kong government has repeatedly denied.
Hong Kong and Chinese authorities have joined forces to block the tide of mainland Chinese illegal immigrants.
The South China Morning Post has said one way to help solve the problem would be to quash the El Dorado myth in China.
"The simplest way to shrink their numbers would be if China dispelled the idea that Hong Kong's streets are paved with gold," the newspaper said.
