Chinese political dissidents living in exile in Hong Kong are making a final dash for Western sanctuary as the clock ticks closer to the British colony's July 1 handover to communist-ruled China.
Fearful over China's future political clout in Hong Kong, scores have fled the territory and a dozen or so other dissidents are pleading with the government to help them out, pro-democracy activists said on Wednesday.
"There are very few now in Hong Kong, just over 10 people," said legislator Lau Chin-shek, spokesman for a pro-democracy group, the Hong Kong Alliance in Support of Patriotic Democratic Movements in China.
"It's depends on whether they think it will be problematic if they remain in Hong Kong. From what the (Chinese) Communist Party has done in the past, it's worrying to these people."
The Alliance, which China has branded as subversive, has helped scores of Chinese dissidents in exile in Hong Kong find sanctuary in third countries before the British-run territory reverts to China just 27 days from now.
"Many left this year. Nineteen left last week," Lau said.
Many fled to Hong Kong in the aftermath of the bloody military crackdown on student activists in Beijing's Tiananmen Square in June 1989. But Lau said he was confident those remaining would be able to leave before July 1.
"We are very confident those eligible for political refugee status will be able to leave. Even the Hong Kong government wants them to leave...it is helping them," Lau said.
Anxieties over the future of Chinese dissidents in Hong Kong mounted as the territory's activists prepared to mourn hundreds, possibly thousands, of victims in China's anti-democracy crackdown, eight years ago to the day.
Up to 40,000 people were expected to attend a candlelit vigil in Hong Kong where organisers will demand a reversal of China's "counter-revolutionary" label on the crushed 1989 movement and the release of political prisoners in the country.
One mainlander, Zhang Taisong, had threatened to set himself on fire at the rally to force the Hong Kong government to quicken the exit of remaining dissidents, the Chinese-language newspaper Apple Daily said on Wednesday.
Worries were aggravated this week after Hong Kong's future leader Tung Chee-hwa said Chinese dissidents who entered the territory illegally cannot stay after the handover.
Tung, who was selected in December to become Hong Kong's first leader under Beijing's auspices, said only those who entered legally and with unlimited stay could continue to live in the territory.
Democratic Party legislator Cheung Man-kwong, also a member of the Alliance, warned that the dissidents could be in danger if they were forced to return to China after the handover.
"If they are forced to leave Hong Kong, it's very dangerous because they are political dissidents. If they go back to China, China will put them in jail," Cheung said.
Prominent Chinese dissident Chai Ling, a leader of the Tiananmen pro-democracy movement, voiced concern over the future of post-handover freedoms when she visited Hong Kong last month.
Chai, now studying at Harvard University in the United States, also urged Hong Kong people to defend their freedoms. Visits like hers might become a thing of the past after July 1.
Tung has announced plans to trim back civil liberties, ban overseas funding for political groups and require police permits for activists to stage protests.
