A four-year saga over Hong Kong's Container Terminal Number Nine (CT9) project was finally resolved on Thursday with a berth swapping plan and removal a key consortium, government officials said at a news conference.
Under the terms of the deal, which received Beijing's blessing on Thursday, British-controlled Jardine Matheson Holdings Ltd no longer leads the consortium, which has been renamed Asia Container Terminals Ltd (ACT).
ACT, formerly the Tsingyi Consortium, would swap the two berths in CT9 originally awarded for two existing berths in the existing Container Terminal Eight (CT8) currently operated by Modern Terminals Ltd (MTL), a unit of Wharf (Holdings) Ltd
The Sea-Land Group would take over from Jardine as leader of the consortium, said an ACT spokesman also present at the news conference.
MTL would build three of the four berths at CT9, while Hong Kong International Terminals Ltd (HIT), a a unit of Hutchison Whampoa Ltd, would build one berth.
Both HIT and MTL would also have one smaller feeder berth each at CT9, officials said.
The contract to develop CT9, which will have an annual capacity of 2.2 million 20-foot equivalent units (TEU) upon completion, was awarded by the Hong Kong government in 1992 to the consortium by private treaty grant.
Tsingyi was originally allocated two berths. Existing container terminal operators, HIT and MTL, were awarded development rights to one berth each.
Beijing, citing the lack of an open tender, had refused to approve the project as required because it straddles Hong Kong's 1997 handover to China.
Beijing had accused the Hong Kong government of rewarding Jardine, a pillar of the British establishment since the colony was founded, for supporting Governor Chris Patten's electoral reforms, themselves the object of bitter Chinese opposition.
Government officials and the terminal operators declined to comment on the political aspects of the case.
"This is purely a commercial decision, it is not political ...no one can force any agreement upon the commercial partners," said Stephen Ip, the Hong Kong government's Secretary for Economic Services.
ACT representatives said the consortium had not discussed the changes with China.
"We had no discussion with the PRC (People's Republic of China) and we've had no political pressure from the PRC," ACT spokesman Ed Aldridge said.
ACT is 29.5 percent owned by Sea-Land. Jardine group companies, Jardine Pacific and the Hongkong Land Holdings Ltd jointly hold 28.5 percent.
Sun Hung Kai Properties Ltd holds 28.5 percent and New World Infrastructure Ltd 13.5 percent.
Officials declined to disclose cost estimates for the project, adding that all other details had yet to be worked out. -- HONG KONG NEWSROOM (852) 28436441
