Sing Tao Holdings Ltd, facing a probe by graft-busters at its Hongkong Standard Newspapers Ltd unit, could see a drop in advertising revenues at its English-language papers, media analysts said on Thursday.
"Advertising will be affected, of course. People look at the circulation when they decide to place ads," said Ben Kwong, research director at Dharmala Securities.
Hongkong Standard Newspapers, a wholly-owned subsidiary of Sing Tao, publishes the English-language Hongkong Standard and Sunday Standard newspapers.
"Advertisers will probably withhold or be hesitant until they have clarification from the company as to what exactly their circulation was," another analyst said.
Hong Kong's graft watchdog, the Independent Commission Against Corruption (ICAC), said it raided the Hongkong Standard offices on Wednesday as part of an investigation into fraudulent inflation of circulation figures.
The ICAC also arrested four current employees and two former staff members.
The ICAC said its investigations had "revealed a scheme which involved the deliberate excess printing of over 10,000 extra copies of the newspapers each day which were purportedly sold to a bogus bulk distributor".
The surplus was actually sold as waste paper, it said in a statement on Wednesday.
"ICAC inquiries also indicated that more recently the deliberately printed surplus and systematic disposal has ranged from 14,000 up to 23,000 copies per day," it said.
A Sing Tao official told Reuters the company would not make any comment while the investigations were continuing.
Trading in Sing Tao shares resumed on Thursday after a one-day suspension. The shares closed HK$0.075 lower at HK$2.90.
Analysts said that while Sing Tao shares would come under some pressure due to the probe at its Hongkong Standard Newspapers unit, the publishing group was not expected to suffer deep cuts to its bottom line as the English-language papers had not brought in much profit in past years.
On Thursday, Sing Tao published an announcement reprinting the ICAC statement and gave results for the group.
"The results of Hongkong Standard for the year ended 31 March, 1996, showed an operating loss in excess of the operating loss of approximately HK$11.7 million (US$1.51 million) incurred by the group in newspaper publishing in that year," the announcement said.
It gave no breakdown of the losses.
"The impact on Sing Tao shares won't be great. Investors anyway don't weight newspaper stocks highly because of their difficult market conditions and keen competition," said Kwong.
Some analysts said Hong Kong's other English-language daily, the South China Morning Post -- published by South China Morning Post (Holdings) Ltd -- would emerge the clear winner.
"If anybody had wanted to save a little bit before by going on a cheaper advertising rate in the Standard, they will now say 'Why take the risk?'" one analyst said.
The ICAC probe is not the first time the Sing Tao group has made news in Hong Kong.
In May, rumours swept the stock market that chairman Sally Aw was in talks to sell all or part of her 68 percent holding in the group to a Malaysian party. Aw denied the rumours.
The group shut its Chinese-language Sing Tao Evening Post newspaper in December, citing sluggish circulation and advertising revenue.
(US$1 = HK$7.74)
-- Hong Kong newsroom (852) 2843 6441. http://www.hk97.com
