Investors swept up in the current wave of "red chip" fever for China-related stocks are at risk of losses because of the poor health of many mainland state-owned companies, a senior economist warned on Friday.
Demand for the Hong Kong-listed companies with mainland ties has accompanied record highs in the Hang Seng index, in a burst of optimism about Hong Kong's handover to China in three weeks.
But Kenneth Courtis, strategist and chief economist at Deutsche Bank Group Asia Pacific, warned that the speculative gains could be short-lived in light of serious problems with mainland Chinese companies.
A growing number of Chinese and China-backed companies have listed in Hong Kong, and the lure of China's huge domestic market and economic potential have proved difficult for foreign investors to resist.
In Hong Kong, punters -- from serious investors to the unsophisticated -- have formed long queues to get their hands on subscription forms to buy new shares, sometimes paying for them, in the hope of making fortunes.
"People who are rushing into the streets to try to pay their $100 to get a subscription form may think they'll be able to sell that some time soon," said Courtis.
"Things like that usually end in tears and it won't be any different this time," he told the Foreign Correspondents Club.
But Courtis said caution would be a better bet as many mainland state-owned companies were losing money and Beijing itself was in a race against time to restructure them.
Chinese state-owned enterprises, which have lived under the shelter of communist rule, remain deeply inefficient and Beijing is encouraging many of them to merge into huge conglomerates in the hope that the stronger firms may help ailing ones.
"We are now in a situation when losses (made) by state companies are so big that they've come to destabilise the financial system," Courtis said.
He said that the problems of these companies are a factor in China's difficult campaign to join the World Trade Organisation (WTO), which promotes free trade and reliance on market forces.
"One of the reasons it is so difficult to negotiate WTO membership for China is that (most) state companies wouldn't survive under WTO rules."
Courtis said he did not think China would enter the WTO for four to five years but was confident the United States will continue Most Favoured Nation (MFN) trade status for China for another year.
"It will go through this year. The President might have to use his veto to overscome the resistance...but the debate will be bitter," he told reporters after his speech to the club.
President Bill Clinton announced in May his decision to renew China's MFN status but many members of Congress have said they will vote against it, angered by China's policies on trade, human and religious rights.
