Future Hong Kong lawmakers, poised for a bitter legal clash with the pro-democracy camp, passed a string of laws on Saturday to come into effect after the territory reverts to China on July 1.
Meeting just across the border in China's Shenzhen city, the 60-member provisional legislature was presented with a series of bills by officials of the future administration led by Hong Kong's chief executive-designate Tung Chee-hwa.
The most crucial was a bill to govern residency rights in Hong Kong after Britain hands its colony of over 150 years back to China at midnight on June 30.
The bill, which passed through two readings on Saturday, is expected to pass a third before June 30 and be "rectified", or officially made into law on July 1.
The meeting came as Hong Kong's Democratic Party warned it will slap a lawsuit within the next few days on the China-backed provisional chamber, which Beijing has vowed to put in place of the current elected legislative council on July 1.
The party, which has 19 seats in the current chamber, claims the provisional legislature is unconstitutional and that it is illegal for two legislatures to operate at the same time.
Hong Kong's Supreme Court facilitated the imminent legal battle when it allowed the Democrats on Thursday to use government funds to fight laws passed by the shadow chamber.
But the looming legal clash threatens to involve more than just Hong Kong's incoming and outgoing lawmaking chambers.
A Beijing mouthpiece accused the British-led administration in Hong Kong of supporting the democrats -- against China.
"The British have once again threatened the smooth transition of sovereignty by allowing legal aid to challenge the laws passed by the provisional legislature," the Beijing-funded Wen Wei Po said in an editorial on Saturday.
Members of the provisional legislature who, like future leader Tung, were carefully selected into office under Beijing's auspices in December, scoffed at the looming lawsuit and claimed the future lawmaking chamber had strong legal basis.
"I'm only sad that Hong Kong must spend so much money over something when the outcome, everyone knows, is a foregone conclusion," said provisional legislator Tam Yiu-chung.
But there was an upbeat note as Hong Kong moves ever closer to the Chinese fold.
A survey conducted by Hong Kong's Home Affairs Branch found 78 percent of Hong Kong people were satisfied with the current situation in the territory, up from 76 percent in a March poll. The survey, done in mid-May, polled a total of 1,503 people.
But confidence levels dipped slightly. Some 72 percent said they expected Hong Kong to remain prosperous and stable, down from 73 percent in March. Twenty percent expected the situation to improve in the next 12 months, down from 24 percent in March.
On the economic front, China made further inroads into Hong Kong's strategic infrastructure industry with the purchase of a stake in Hong Kong Telecommunications Ltd.
In an announcement late on Friday, Cable &amp; Wireless Plc, parent of HongKong Telecoms, said it sold a 5.5 percent stake to state-owned China Telecom for US$1.185 billion.
