Future legislators on Saturday defied an imminent legal challenge and passed a string of laws for Hong Kong which will come into effect after the territory reverts to Chinese rule at midnight on June 30.
The 60-member provisional legislature met in Shenzhen, just across the border in China, where it was presented with a series of bills by officials of the future administration led by Hong Kong's chief executive-designate Tung Chee-hwa.
A crucial bill governing residency rights in Hong Kong after Britain hands it back to China on July 1 passed through two readings, Hong Kong's Wharf Cable TV station reported.
Three bills governing the membership of municipal bodies after the handover passed through all three readings, it said.
Under rules laid down earlier by the future chamber, proposed bills must go through three readings before July 1.
They will then be ratified as post-handover Hong Kong laws on July 1.
The provisional legislature was formed under Beijing's auspices in December and is poised to replace the current elected chamber, which China will disband, on July 1.
Its meeting in Shenzhen, however, follows a warning by the Democratic Party that it would file a lawsuit against the shadow chamber within the next few days claiming it was illegal to have two legislatures operating at the same time.
The imminent lawsuit has been facilitated by an earlier ruling by Hong Kong's Supreme Court allowing the Democrats to use government funds to fight laws passed by the shadow chamber.
But in Shenzhen, members of the provisional legislature scoffed at the imminent legal battle and claimed the future lawmaking chamber had strong legal basis.
"I'm only sad that Hong Kong must spend so much money over something when the outcome, everyone knows, is a foregone conclusion," said provisional legislator Tam Yiu-chung.
The president of the shadow body, Rita Fan, also waved it off.
"It (the threatened lawsuit) won't affect the work of the provisional legislature...It doesn't bother me at all. I'm confident we will prevail in the end," Fan told reporters.
The provisional chamber holds meetings, however, in Shenzhen, instead of Hong Kong, to fend off potential legal attacks.
The bill on residency rights, which was unveiled by future leader Tung on Friday, will tighten rules on immigrants getting permanent residency after July 1, local television stations reported.
It proposes that illegal immigrants, after residing in the territory for seven years, need permission from the immigration chief to receive permanent right of abode.
Under the current system, they are automatically granted permanent residency after seven years.
Critics on Saturday lambasted the bill as a way of keeping out Chinese dissidents, but a senior Tung aide dismissed the charge.
"Everyone, if they enter Hong Kong illegally, cannot get permanent residency in Hong Kong. This does not mean we are targeting any group of people," Elsie Leung, the future Justice Secretary told reporters.
Provisional legislator Henry Tang agreed.
"We will be part of China, in the event that there is any advocacy of splitting with the motherland, or other such activities, we must have laws (against them)," Tang said.
