Hong Kong's future leader Tung Chee-hwa assured the Democratic Party on Tuesday that it will not be cast out into the cold when China resumes control over the territory at midnight June 30.
But Tung rejected the Democrats' request to leave Hong Kong's election system alone, party chairman Martin Lee said.
Speaking to reporters after a one-hour meeting with Tung, Lee said his party wanted spokesmen on various issues to have "direct contact" with the future government.
"Mr Tung is supportive of the idea and we are very happy," he said.
The Democrats accuse Tung of seeking to alter Hong Kong's first-past-the-post voting methods specifically to dilute their presence in Hong Kong's legislature.
Tung and his advisers are considering replacing the British-style system with a form of proportional representation or multi-seat single vote system and have sought the views of the public.
"This seems to be a case of starting with the desired result," Lee said.
"Reducing the number of democrats and working backwards to an electoral system which will produce this result."
Hong Kong has been a British colony for more than 150 years. A China-selected lawmaking chamber is poised to replace the current elected body which Beijing will disband at the handover.
The Democratic Party, the largest party with 19 seats in the current legislature, boycotted the incoming provisional chamber, and its members will be cast into the political wilderness for about a year.
They plan to contest the first post-handover elections scheduled in mid-1998 under new electoral laws to be passed by the interim-appointed chamber.
Tung denies scrapping the first-past-the-post system is designed to dilute the influence of the democrats.
Lee said Tung had rejected the Democratic Party's proposal for a taskforce to amend Hong Kong's future constitition, the China-promulgated Basic Law, to speed the path to full democracy in Hong Kong.
"We raised with Mr Tung the setting up of a taskforce to review the Basic Law provisions on democracy. We told Mr Tung that the pace for democratisation as contained in the Basic Law is much, much too slow," Lee said.
"Even by the year 2003, still half of the legislature will not be democratically elected by the people of Hong Kong.
"But Mr Tung gave us a flat no... We are extremely unhappy about that," Lee said.
The Basic Law provides for creeping democratisation leading to a fully elected legislature after 10 years.
At present, only 20 of the 60 seats are directly elected. Ten are returned by an electoral college made up of local civic authority chiefs and the rest are allocated to business and professional bodies in what are known as "functional constituencies".
