Hong Kong yachtsmen bent with the wind on Thursday, voting overwhelmingly to adopt a Chinese name, two weeks before the territory's return to Chinese rule on July 1.
While keeping the name "Royal Hong Kong Yacht Club" in English, members of the elite colonial sporting club voted in a show of hands to adopt a Chinese name, which when translated would simply mean "Hong Kong Yacht Club".
At an extraordinary general meeting called to decide on the Chinese name, club commodore David Kong admitted to more than 200 members that the Chinese name was a compromise.
The club, which to this day has fewer ethnic Chinese members than Westerners, was deeply divided last year when its mostly British members fought hard to keep the "Royal" tag on the English name.
Chinese members lobbied hard but failed twice to remove the "Royal" tag, a symbol of British colonialism that they felt would be inappropriate after Hong Kong reverts to China.
"The proposal we have in front of us is a compromise. We are being courteous and considerate to the incoming government and courteous and considerate to our members," Kong told members.
Still, about seven members at the meeting voted nay.
"What is this? One club, two names?" one member joked aloud, drawing uproarious laughter and applause from the rest.
Hong Kong, a British colony for 156 years, will revert to China from July 1 under a "one country, two systems" formula, espoused by China's late paramount leader Deng Xiaoping.
"I don't see why we should be inconsistent. If we are "Royal" in English, we should be "huang jia" in Chinese," a Caucasian member said at the meeting. "Huang jia" is "Royal" in Mandarin, China's official language.
Choi Chung-yung, a member since 1984, said it was important not to have "huang jia" in the Chinese name.
"If we are known as "Royal" after the handover, we may be disadvantaged if ever we need help from Chinese authorities because we will be seen as British," Choi said.
"Anyway, since the day I joined, I've never seen the "Royal" as meaningful or prestigious, unlike the British," he said.
Long before July 1, other elite clubs in Hong Kong have dropped their "Royal" tags and are now known simply as the Hong Kong Jockey Club and the Hong Kong Golf Club.
The queen's portrait has also been knocked off stamps and coins in favour of the territory's harbour skyline.
