In a move certain to anger Beijing, publisher Penguin group and Chinese activists on Friday launched a compilation of letters and essays written in prison by prominent Chinese dissident Wei Jingsheng.
China's Foreign Ministry has already denounced publication of the book "The Courage To Stand Alone", which contains excerpts of hundreds of letters Wei wrote to his siblings, prison authorities and top members of China's Communist Party.
The eloquent and fearless letters were written during his 14-year (1979 to 1993) imprisonment, most of the time while in solitary confinement in a tiny cell.
Wei, 47, is China's best known dissident and regarded as the father of China's democracy movement.
He was jailed in 1979 for counter-revolutionary incitement after advocating democratic change when he referred to democracy as China's much needed "fifth modernisation".
Wei managed to obtain his letters, many of which were never mailed but kept in his prison dossier, just before he was released from jail in September 1993.
After six months of freedom, Wei was detained again in 1994 and later sentenced to a further 14 years for treason.
At a news conference on Friday, Chinese pro-democracy activists called for the immediate release of Wei, who has been denied medical attention for his deteriorating health.
"I am asking all of you, the people of Hong Kong and all freedom loving people of the world, to join me in demanding Wei Jingsheng's immediate and unconditional release," said Xiao Qiang, executive director of lobby group Human Rights in China.
"Democracy and human rights are not luxuries for Chinese people, they are necessities," Xiao said.
Wei, now in a jail in Hebei province, has arthritis, high blood pressure and stomach problems, and his spirit is now flagging, according to members of his family who are allowed to visit him once a month, said Robin Munro of Human Rights Watch/Asia.
"From accounts of his family, he has become very despondent. We have to be worried about his survival this time," said Munro.
Also present at the news conference was dissident Liu Qing, and close friend of Wei, who was jailed for 10 years for publishing the transcript of Wei's 1979 trial.
Liu told reporters he was worried about the future of political and human rights in Hong Kong after midnight June 30, when the territory of 6.4 million people reverts to Chinese rule after 156 years as a British colony.
Under Sino-British treaties on Hong Kong's handover, the territory is promised a high degree of self rule under a "one country, two systems" formula that was espoused by the late Deng.
"For the long term, I cannot believe in China's dictatorship. In the last few decades, this government has never kept to its words. It has always gone back on its words, its policy on Tibet and many other policies," Liu said.
"I cannot say that Hong Kong will be an exception to this record," said Liu, the chairman of Human Rights in China.
