Britain and China signalled on Monday that they are set to discuss Beijing's late request to deploy more troops in Hong Kong before the territory reverts to Chinese rule at midnight this June 30.
Top British and Chinese officials on the Joint Liaison Group (JLG), a body handling details of Hong Kong's transfer, also said they were confident the matter would soon be resolved.
Beijing's request to have more of its People's Liberation Army (PLA) troops positioned in Hong Kong before the handover emerged last week and was quickly surrounded in controversy.
British officials were adamant there was no question of London agreeing to China's request as the British garrison alone remains responsible till the handover, barely two weeks away.
But on Monday, a top British representative on the JLG said both sides would soon discuss the issue.
"The subject has been on our agenda to discuss and we're continuing to discuss it," Hugh Davies told reporters.
Zhao Jihua, Davies' Chinese counterpart on the JLG, told reporters that Beijing thought it was necessary to have more troops deployed in Hong Kong before the handover.
"There is a practical need. It is a matter that needs to be resolved and we hope to solve it," Zhao said.
China has said it needs a few hours before the midnight handover ceremony to deploy its main force.
Beijing has already sent an advance party of 200 soldiers to prepare garrison, supply and communication facilities. Britain insisted they be unarmed and wear uniforms only in barracks.
Many Hong Kong people are jittery about the arrival of the PLA as they remember the comunist army's bloody crackdown on pro-democracy protesters in Beijing's Tiananmen Square in 1989.
But both Zhao and Davies gave no sign whether Britain would concede to China's latest request.
"We've made our position clear already," Davies said, but he added: "I think the arrival of the PLA will take place as around July 1. We're not going to discuss what we're going to be talking about privately on the subject."
Beijing's request to send more troops and London's clear refusal last week threatened to deepen a rift over Hong Kong's sovereignty changeover.
London, together with Washington, angered Beijing last week by saying they will boycott the swearing-in of a China-backed legislature during the midnight handover party to replace Hong Kong's current democratically-elected chamber.
Beijing has vowed to disband the existing chamber, removing at a stroke democratic reforms introduced unilaterally by Britain inthe twilight years of its rule in Hong Kong.
