On a stage full of Hong Kong popstars, a middle-aged woman, cracking jokes, stole the show on Tuesday as Hong Kong's future first lady and a song-writer.
This was a kind of solo debut for Betty Tung who has written the lyrics of a song the world will hear when Hong Kong rejoins China on July 1.
Till now she has been overshadowed by her husband, prospective leader Tung Chee-hwa, an ex-shipping tycoon still wary of the public spotlight.
Accompanied by photographers' popping flashlights and questioning journalists, she walked into a studio and beamed widely, taking it all in her stride.
Tung Chee-hwa and Betty will be Hong Kong's leading couple from midnight June 30 when Britain hands the territory to China and governor Chris Patten and his wife Lavender sail away.
Elegantly dressed in a blue navy suit with a scarf, Betty took to the stage with half a dozen popular music stars to announce a musical gala on July 1, first day of Chinese rule.
Featuring in the "Hong Kong Medley" during the gala show is a song, "The Homecoming", in which Betty stars as lyricist.
"I don't know who you've come to see, but I've come to see my idols," Betty told reporters as she posed next to heartthrobs of the local popular music scene -- Jacky Cheung, Andy Lau, Aaron Kwok, George Lam and Sally Yeh -- who will all belt out the medley on July 1.
Little known in the past to the Hong Kong public, Tung and his wife were thrown into media glare when he was selected in December to become the territory's first post-handover leader.
But Betty seems to have taken on her demanding public role with consummate ease, perhaps even more so than her husband.
"Do I not look good to you?" she shot out to one reporter when asked how well she and her husband were taking to their new public roles, before promptly taking the next question.
Announcers at the packed news conference said Betty provided inspiration for the "The Homecoming" and wrote the lyrics.
But the first lady-to-be sought to play down the accolade.
"I do not know musical notes, I just felt the song was so good to my ear and I was very much encouraged to do a bit of thinking," she told reporters.
"But I really didn't contribute very much to the song, I really must pass the microphone to my colleagues who did most of the work," she said.
Her husband, meanwhile, will be surprised.
"Mr Tung doesn't know I'm here. I think I've told him that there is a song. His staff has heard it."
"But he's so very busy with the handover, I hope he will be very pleasantly surprised," Betty said.
