Asia's "party of the century" arouses few cheers from a minority of active democrats in Hong Kong who fear Chinese rule will bring repression of liberties.
For these activists, campaigning at home and abroad for better guarantees from Beijing, there is little cause for celebration when the clock strikes midnight this June 30.
They plan protests as Britain hands Hong Kong back to China, which brands some supporters as "subversive," and in the future to test the extent of cherished civil liberties.
Leaders of the movement have thrown down a gauntlet to Chinese authorities by vowing to force their way into parliament as the world watches Britain hand the territory back to China.
The pro-democracy campaigners remain sceptical about China's pledged self-rule for Hong Kong for 50 years under a "one country, two systems" formula espoused by the late paramount leader Deng Xiaoping.
Worries abound, they say, that the future administration under shipping tycoon Tung Chee-hwa, whom China supports, will curb rights and civil liberties in the territory of 6.4 million.
"When international attention dies down, who knows what will happen? What will happen when people become complacent?" said Law Yuk-kai, director of Hong Kong Human Rights Monitor.
Controversially, when Hong Kong, a British colony of 156 years, reverts to China, an interim 60-member lawmaking chamber will replace the existing elected legislature, to the dismay of democrats and the West.
With this one step, Beijing will remove at a stroke democratic reforms introduced unilaterally by the British-led administration during its twilight years of rule in Hong Kong.
The interim chamber has also passed laws which from July 1 will ban foreign funding for political groups and require people to apply for police permits before they can stage protests.
Now, the police need only be informed ahead of protests.
Even more sinister, activists say, is Tung's introduction of a broad concept of "national security" which empowers the police to reject applications if they are thought to threaten Hong Kong's 'security' or China's territorial integrity.
"I expect the human rights situation to deteriorate, if Hong Kong people don't stand firm and there is no support from political leaders overseas," Law said in a recent interview.
"If such concepts like 'national security' are used for political convenience, it's an end to all freedoms. Anything that is thought to challenge the future administration can be struck down by this concept," he said.
Chinese officials have also warned against any advocacy of independence for Taiwan or Tibet, and self-censorship has wormed its way into the local press, which until recently was among the world's freest and most vibrant.
"Journalists have told us they are worried and are under great pressure and are practising self-censorship," Law said.
Chinese political dissidents in exile have warned of tough days ahead and said they could not conceive of China keeping to its pledge of a high degree of self rule for Hong Kong.
"In the long term, I cannot believe China's dictatorship. In the last few decades, this government has never kept to its words. It has always gone back on its promises, its policies on Tibet, many other policies," said Liu Qing, who was jailed for 10 years before leaving for the United States in 1992.
Another warned of possible abuses. "'National seurity' worries me, there is a real danger. It has already been used against Chinese people as a tool to suppress political dissent. It can be similarly abused in Hong Kong," said Xiao Qiang, executive director of the New York-based Human Rights in China lobby group, in a recent interview.
But some inveterate pro-democracy activists are here to stay, despite the odds. Emboldened by the international glare enveloping Hong Kong, hopefully for years to come, they are banking on hopes that Beijing would not dare go too far.
"This is my home and I don't intend to leave at all," said Martin Lee, leader of the Democratic Party, Hong Kong's largest party.
"I don't think they are going to do anything nasty to my family. I don't believe they will dare do such things--what will people say if anything happens?" said the accomplished lawyer, who has no foreign passport or residency rights overseas.
But the fear runs deeper for some. Law, married to a fellow activist, has no children--by choice. "My wife and I, we can choose the way we want to live, but our children can't," Law, an activist for over 10 years, said.
Taxi-driver Shing Wai-pong, a seasoned protestor, has packed off his Malaysian-Chinese wife and daughter to Malaysia. "I am prepared for the worst. I am not afraid of death or jail. My wife and child left Hong Kong so now I have nothing to worry about," he said recently.
