Its wheels whirring non-stop, Hong Kong is moving into top gear to prepare for one of the high points in its history -- its return to Chinese rule at midnight on June 30 after a century and a half as a British colony.
In a land where people are often too busy rushing about their own business and civil servants too occupied to pay heed to the walk-in visitor, the historic changeover is giving the city a sparkling facelift.
Roads and tiny lanes leading to the Hong Kong Convention and Exhibition Centre, where the midnight handover ceremony will take place, have been cleared of street-sleepers. In theiur place are pretty potted plants and ornamental iron fences.
Elaborate "1997 handover" lighting displays depicting dragons, dolphins and orchids illuminate glassy tower blocks.
In just 12 days, Britain will hand Hong Kong back to China.
As the big night nears, over 4,000 VIPs including heads of state, ministers and officials from all over the world will descend upon the territory to witness the historic flag change.
Thanks to almost 8,000 foreign reporters, specially flown in for the occasion, the event will be beamed to every television set and chronicled in every newspaper on the planet.
Tiny, famously industrious, Hong Kong is leaving nothing to chance.
Hotels have given intensive training to bellboys and chambermaids so they can field, as well as any schoolmaster, tough questions from puzzled VIPs or hustling reporters on Hong Kong history, geography, nightlife and typhoon threats.
At front-line government offices, civil servants seconded to the huge celebration machinery beam from ear to ear as they try to cater to the whims of visiting and local newsmen.
"I'm really impressed," a local reporter said as she walked into a press liaison office to get her identification dog tag.
On hand were a dozen staff and she was on his way in under 10 minutes with a stylish sling-bag full of giveaways -- courtesy of blue-chip sponsors only too happy to play a part.
At Hong Kong's top-notch hotels, employees have been given security clearance by police and their best suites, reserved for the VIPs, will be swept clean with bomb detectors.
Anyone up to mischief or with no business at the hotel stands little chance of getting his toe over the lintel, said a public relations manager at the five-star hotel JW Marriot.
"The Hong Kong police is very much involved. From the 28th, guests coming in and out must go through metal detectors, just like in airports," manager Peachie Dieken said.
JW Marriot will be playing host to 11 heads of state, and some rooms have even been reserved for police officers during the handover, in case they are needed for any emergency.
