Internationally-known Hong Kong democracy campaigner Martin Lee, long branded a "subversive" by Beijing, plans to stay here and fight on for civil liberties under China's rule.
He has no foreign passport in his back pocket. Lee, leader of Hong Kong's democracy movement, says he has no intention of taking flight before or after midnight June 30 when Britain hands the territory back to China.
Lee's bookish, soft-spoken demeanour belies his skill as a political maestro winning audiences in the West in a long, dogged fight for freedoms in Hong Kong.
The 58-year-old leader of Hong Kong's largest political group, the Democratic Party, became China's marked man the day he stood up before formidable Communist Party elders, including the late paramount leader Deng Xiaoping.
In the Great Hall of the People in Beijing he gave them a polite but stern lecture.
"What do you mean by people who love China or love Hong Kong? Do you mean people who would say things the leaders of China would like to hear?" the bespectacled Lee grilled them.
"Or do you mean these are people who genuinely love Hong Kong and would say honest things about Hong Kong--although maybe critical of the Chinese government?" he asked.
Lee's lecture harked back to a day in 1987, when he questioned Deng who earlier promised a time of great prosperity for everyone who "loves China and loves Hong Kong" after the British colony of 156 years is handed back to Beijing.
His powerful and elderly audience appeared shocked by his forthright tone but they will get their own back very soon.
At midnight June 30, Lee loses his seat in Hong Kong's elected legislative council, which will be disbanded to make way for a provisional legislature, which China supports.
But the criminal lawyer with a successful practice does not intend to call his political career quits, let alone flee.
"This is my home and I don't intend to leave at all," Lee said in a recent interview. "If you really want to achieve democracy then you must stay to fight for it, once you leave there is very little you can do."
Son of a Nationalist (Kuomintang) general and the sixth of seven children, Lee was born in Hong Kong in 1938. He graduated from the University of Hong Kong and took his first job at a secondary school teaching English history and Bible studies.
The devout Catholic later left for London to read law before returning in 1966 to start his own practice.
His entry into politics came in 1985 when he was elected to the legislative council to represent the legal profession.
"My little worm of conscience made me ask what I had done for the community, having taken so much out of it," he once said.
A firm believer in humanitarian values, Lee has not looked back since. Loudly critical of both Britain and China, Lee has travelled the world to lobby for international pressure to keep China in check and highlight problems of Hong Kong's handover.
"Listen to Hong Kong people. There is no doubt that the people of Hong Kong want democracy, human rights and the rule of law," he wrote in a recent article in a British newspaper.
"Don't sacrifice Hong Kong for trade with China. Don't bow to economic blackmail or to the entirely predictable insistence of Beijing's leaders that Hong Kong is China's internal affair," Lee said, targeting British leaders.
His most prominent success came in April when he won an audience at the White House and a pledge from President Bill Clinton that Hong Kong's freedoms will be looked after.
Lee has been constantly attacked by pro-China politicians and even Hong Kong's future leader Tung Chee-hwa has accused him of "badmouthing" the territory abroad.
But Lee refuses to give up and he vows to fight elections, scheduled in mid-1998.
"We'll continue to work for Hong Kong people and we'll continue with our fight for democracy, freedoms and the rule of law and human rights..."We'll continue to be the voice of Hong Kong," he said.
