A stunning dazzle of laser beams and dozens of powerful search lights dancing to music will illuminate Hong Kong's famous harbourfront skyline on the night of July 1, when the territory is once more a part of China.
It will be a night at the harbour Hong Kong will never forget, organisers said, and the hour-long extravaganza, which includes a parade of giant lanterns, will end in final big bang with the largest ever display of fireworks.
Neon lights, which have come to typify Hong Kong's skyline by night, will be shut off just before the show and turned on during a "dramatic moment" in the laser beam display, they said. Dubbed the "Hong Kong 97 Spectacular", organisers said they just want the territory of 6.4 million, which Britain will hand back to China at midnight on June 30, to have fun.
"After the politics is over, it's time for everyone to have fun," said Adam Bezark, show director and writer, who started planning the show last November.
Organised by the privately funded Better Hong Kong Foundation, the HK$100 million (US$13 million) extravaganza is sponsored by corporate giants in the territory.
"It's a gift from Hong Kong to Hong Kong," Bezark said.
In just 10 days Hong Kong, a British-ruled colony for over 150 years, will return to the Chinese fold.
Over 4,000 VIPs including heads of state are due to descend on Hong Kong and, in a land famed for its punctiliousness, last-minute preparations for the historic changeover are proceeding at clockwork efficiency.
Fairy lights now adorn bridges and buildings fronting the harbour. At the Hong Kong Exhibition and Convention Centre, where the midnight handover ceremony will be held, workers are putting the finishing touches to a new wing built for the event.
The entire territory has undergone a drastic transformation in the run-up to the handover. Miniature flags of China and the future Hong Kong, depicting the tropical hybrid bauhinia flower, are strung up in residential estates.
On a more serious note, police carried out their first extensive search for suspicious objects around areas of the handover ceremony venue on Friday and would keep up vigilance until all the main festivities are over around July 2.
"Around 2,000 police officers will guard the cordoned-off areas, especially during the peak dates between June 28 and July 2", a police spokeswoman told Reuters.
The event has prompted a proliferation of 1997 souvenirs and China entrepreneurs, too, are cashing in on the fever.
Wine maker Dynasty has just shipped in hundreds of crates of a new edition, which it boasts is "The Official 1997 Wine" and retails now at HK$119 (US$15.4).
"By Special Appointment of the Association for Celebration of Reunification of Hong Kong with China", its label says.
