The largest electricity provider in the United States marched into Asia on Thursday with a US$2.7 billion deal to buy independent Hong Kong power producer, Consolidated Electric Power Asia Ltd.
Atlanta-based Southern Co said it made a general offer to all CEPA's shareholders after agreeing to buy most of a 60.4-percent stake held by CEPA parent, Hopewell Holdings Ltd.  
"The plan is to use this company as our growth vehicle in Asia," Ray Harris, regional director of Southern Electric International Inc, a unit of the Southern Co, told a news conference in the British colony.
"We think we paid a fair price and we see it as completing our geographical diversification from the United States," he said.
Hopewell said Southern aims to acquire 80 percent of CEPA's shares through a straightforward cash deal of HK$18.50 per share, or a cash and stock offer, he said.  
Hopewell has already agreed to tender 80 percent of its stake under an alternative cash and stock option, which offers one new CEPA share, cash of HK$69.50 and a contingency payment of HK$8.00 for every five CEPA shares.
The contingency payment depends on the company managing to secure a limited recourse debt for a power plant in Indonesia.
Hopewell will retain between 12.1 percent and 20 percent of the new company depending on which option shareholders choose.  
Southern's planned acquisition of 80 percent of CEPA's shares will effectively privatise the company, reducing its public float below Hong Kong stock exchange requirements and requiring it to de-list.
Shareholders, banks and regulators must still approve the deal, with shareholder meetings slated for November. Closing is expected before the end of the year.
Both Southern and CEPA said the takeover complements each other's strengths, with Southern renowned for its operating ability and CEPA one of the first to exploit Asia's quickening thirst for power.  
"This is, we felt, a very, very good marriage," said Stewart Elliott, CEPA's chief executive officer and managing director. "If we're going to see Asian growth as everyone has predicted, a massive amount of power is required."
Founded in 1993 as a holding company for Hopewell's power assets, CEPA owns some of southern China's largest power plants.
Its flagship Shajiao B project in Guangdong province was completed in 1987 at a cost of US$4.1 billion followed by the 1994 start-up of the US$1.87 billion Shajiao C power station.  
CEPA also owns substantial assets in the Philippines, and said it is negotiating to build more generating plants in southern China, the Philippines, Indonesia, India and Pakistan.
Harris said Southern was committed to pursuing all CEPA's existing plans, which he hopes will be augmented by Southern's expertise and financial muscle.
"We are very optimistic about the future... We would hope we would have some announcements in relation to new power plants (in the next six to 12 months)," Harris said.
Elliott and Gordon Wu, CEPA's executive chairman and the founder of Hopewell, will remain in place, he said.
