Twentieth Century Fox joined the hunt for a larger slice of the Asia-Pacific video market on Thursday by announcing a new regional office in Hong Kong for its home entertainment division.
"We believe this is an under-developed market and therefore represents one of the best growth opportunities we have," said Jeffrey Yapp, president of Twentieth Century Fox Home Entertainment International. Twentieth Century Fox is owned By News Corp Ltd.
The new regional headquarters, which forms a crucial part of Fox's recent restructuring, will oversee marketing and distribution for video subsidiaries in Japan, Korea, Australia and India.
"In the last two years, Fox Home Entertainment International has completely restructured the way we do business," Yapp said.
"We set out to establish regional offices to provide a regional focus and give us an opportunity to better coordinate local efforts," he said.
About US$2 million has been spent and 15 people hired as part of the expansion into Asia, which accounts for 38 percent of the video division's revenue and contains its largest territory in terms of revenue contribution, Japan.
"It's for sure Japan is our major market and ahead of Hong Kong but this is a regional office and Hong Kong is the place in Asia to put your regional office," said Marc Cudennec, senior vice-president at Fox Home International.
The international focus was one of three critical strategies adopted in a drastic overhaul of Twentieth Century Fox 18 months ago, Yapp said.
"Fox realized that to become the premier filmed entertainment company, it had to focus on the international market place," he said.
Yapp said Asia's rising revenue contribution played a big role in reinforcing the importance of international expansion, as did an evening out of theatrical revenues from a prior ratio of 30 percent international, 70 percent U.S.
Fox's two other restructuring strategies, setting up four distinct production units and beefing up executive and creative talent, are well underway and reaping rewards, he added.
The number of films in development on the lot has increased from 60 to over 450 while the number of pictures being released by the studio has grown to 23 this year from 14 last year.
Fox also hopes to increase its share of the top 10 all time best selling live action videos from five to six with the video release on December 3 of its new blockbuster, Independence Day, which has grossed US$600 million in box office sales this year.
"Fox Home Entertainment is off to a very strong start on the road to the future," Yapp said. "Our projected revenues will increase 30 percent in 1997 and contribution will increase by 43 percent. The goal has been established our objectives have been set and the path to the future has been charted."
-- Hong Kong Newsroom (852) 2843 6441
