Indonesia's nascent funds industry will remain dormant until the government steps in and provides a boost, experts attending a mutual fund conference said on Monday.
"There needs to be somebody giving them a push. The push can come not just from banks, not just from private institutions, but from the government," said Venkatagiri Mudeliar, deputy general manager of Dresdner Thornton Asset Management in Singapore.
Despite its obvious promise, Indonesia's mutual funds industry faces substantial obstacles, including unbeatable returns from bank deposits offering up to 17 percent per annum.
One speaker said that more than 60 percent of pension fund assets valued at US$2.4 billion were held in bank deposits. Seven newly-established mutual funds with assets of about US$642 million were similarly invested.
Among recommended measures at the conference were tax benefits for mutual fund investors, permission to allow domestic savings to flow offshore and a major educational drive.
Felia Salim, director of the Jakarta Stock Exchange, told the conference that government discussions to provide a tax break to mutual fund investors were underway, and more than 40 percent of the bourse's budget for 1997 was dedicated to educating the public about the benefits of mutual fund investment.
But delegates said with international investment prohibited and foreign investment restrictions of 49 percent, incentives to setting up investment management subsidiaries in Indonesia were limited despite the industry's promise.
"Internationally, it's always a nervous position for a foreign fund manager to be in when it appears investment is a one-way street," said Paul Smith, managing director at the Bank of Bermuda in Hong Kong.
Foreign fund managers would be more likely to establish fund management subsidiaries in Indonesia if there were opportunities to manage Indonesian money offshore, he said.
"It's a hard call to make for a foreign fund manager to come down here and set up shop just to manage Indonesian domestic mutual fund business, which at the moment is a very small pie," Smith said.
Mudeliar said Indonesia is clearly committed to speeding up the establishment of its financial infrastructure, and catching up with its more developed Southeast Asian neighbours.
"Yes, they have lost out for a number of years but as you know nowadays knowledge is so freely available that they don't have to wait a full 15 years or 20 years," Mudeliar said.
"(They can make a) quantum leap in another five years. They can buy expertise, they can buy information ... I think Indonesia will be something to reckon with in the next 10 years."
-- Jakarta Newsroom
