Indonesia's infant mutual funds industry is poised for rapid growth with far-reaching consequences for the country's financial markets and economy, a mutual funds conference in Jakarta was told on Monday.
"There is enormous potential for change," John Booth, Asia managing director for the mutual funds services firm DST International, told fund management experts.
The adoption of a Capital Markets Law earlier this year paved the way for the creation of open-ended mutual funds in Indonesia, which, until recently, offered only one closed-end fund.
"These are sweeping changes which, if successful, could change the savings profile of the country, deepen the secondary market significantly and have a profound effect on the banking and mutual funds industries," Booth said.
Indonesia's population of nearly 200 million people, combined with the forecast economic growth rate of 7.5 percent this year and a high savings rate typical of most Asian nations, promise lucrative returns to mutual fund trailblazers, he said.
Seven open-ended mutual funds, or "reksa dana," have been established so far with a value of US$640 million, and five more are in the pipeline.
Most, however, will focus on fixed income instruments rather that equities because of high-yielding bank deposits and uneven returns from Jakarta's illiquid stock market, where four large stocks account for 25 percent of volume and foreign investors account for about 70 percent of trading value.
"Obviously, equity markets are more volatile, and if people invest in them initially and they have a bad experience, it could harm the industry," Booth said.
He declined to predict how long it would take for mutual funds to boost liquidity on the Jakarta Stock Exchange. But exchange director Felia Salim suggested a guaranteed return to first-time mutual fund investors would speed up the development of a domestic funds industry and, hence, market efficiency.
"If we are to produce a domestic investor base, this would be something of a short-cut," Salim said. "If we rely on education it will take forever. The best pull is to experience an immediate capital gain."
Salim noted a guaranteed return was successfully used by Malaysia, which has set up two state funds in an attempt to even out socio-economic disparities. Malaysia has a domestic investor base of 3.31 million compared with Indonesia's tiny base of under 400,000, or less than one percent of the population.
Salim said Indonesia was unlikely to follow precisely the same model, adding that the country has an upper class of 1.2 million households with an average of 2.5 million rupiah in savings per year. However, surveys have shown a very low awareness of mutual funds within this group.
She added that while Indonesia's potential as a mutual fund investing nation remains spectacular, the stock exchange faces a substantial hurdle in education: only 17 percent of the population knows what a stock exchange is.
DST's Booth said the stock exchange and financial market regulators would also have to work hard to enhance transparency.
