Ambitious plans to establish Islamic mutual funds in Indonesia include the "cleansing" of profits disallowed under Islamic law, a senior fund manager told a mutual funds conference on Tuesday.
Islamic law prohibits Moslems from earning interest on bank deposits or investing in certain types of equities.
But Nik Ezar Nik Bolia, chief executive officer of Malaysia's DCB-RHB Unit Trust Management Berhad, said the company had come up with a tried and tested method of working around the rules.
"The cleansing process takes out the impact of the interest earned," he said. "It's against Islam to gain interest on a deposit, so we remove and give to charity a proportion of the total profit."
DCB-RHB's efforts have lured US$80 million into a domestic Islamic fund in Malaysia, where 54 percent of the population is Moslem, he said.
More than 85 percent of Indonesia's population of nearly 200 million is Moslem, suggesting an equally promising future awaits any fund that appeals to the nation's religious principles.
"Southeast Asia has a combined population of 220 million Moslems," Nik said. "Therefore any product based on Islamic principles will be highly successful."
To allay concern about stock market investments, Malaysia's Bank of Islam has set up panels of scholars to vet individual stocks to ensure they are "halal", or comply with Sharia law by avoiding liquor, gambling, pornography or footwear, Nik said.
"Then we look at the core business," he said. "If it is halal that is fine, but if a subisidiary is not halal, the parent company will be rejected. However, if the subsidiary is halal and the parent company not, the subsidiary is halal and will be accepted."
The same system will be set up in Indonesia by DCB-RHB's subisidiary, P.T. Rashid Hussain Asset Management, Nik said.
However, there are substantial obstacles blocking the path to Moslem mutual fund investment in Indonesia. Among the most obvious is a relatively casual approach to religion.
"In Malaysia, the law is enforced. If you are not fasting the police can come and catch you, but in Indonesia, religion is encouraged but if you don't do it no one really cares," said one delegate to the conference.
Nik countered that 40 percent of Indonesia's Moslems are observant, but conceded that a 1,000-person survey disclosed that most were already investing in prohibited bank deposits.
"Earning interest on bank deposits is a no-no under Sharia law and 61 percent said they knew that, but there is no alternative investment," Nik said.
He admitted that persuading these investors to switch into lower-yielding stock market funds subject to profit-cleansing presented a formidable challenge. But he said that savings put towards the Moslem pilgrimage to Mecca offered hope.
"That will be the trick that we have to perform...but every year Indonesia has a high proportion of people going to Mecca," he said.
"This is my target market. If one of them were to save from ground zero to seven million rupiah into our fund before they redeem to go to Mecca, it is a captive market."
Each year 195,000 Indonesian Moslems pay 7.55 million rupiah to participate in the government-organised pilgramage to Mecca.
(US$1 = 2,327 rupiah)
