Regulations issued by Indonesia earlier this year promoting the creation of mutual funds have become a landmark for the local industry, delegates to a conference said on Wednesday.
"The recognition of open-end funds or mutual funds by the Capital Market Law has been quite instrumental in the development of the Indonesian investment fund industry over the past few months," said Melli Darsa of the law firm Hadiputranto, Hadinoto and Partners in Jakarta.
Darsa was one of several fund experts attending a mutual fund conference in Jakarta who predicted a bright future for the domestic industry, with seven open-end mutual funds already established and five more in the pipeline.
Indonesia released regulations in May outlining accounting methods, reporting procedures and valuation methods for open-end mutual funds, which were allowed for the first time by the country's 1995 Capital Market Law.
The new legal framework gives Indonesia an edge, placing it half-way between the high risk and reward markets in China and India and the most exciting developed countries, most of which have hostile tax regimes, said Anthony Travers of the Hong Kong law firm Maples and Calder.
"In many respects, Indonesia is a halfway house," Travers told the conference. "Indonesia has a much more developed (financial) infrastructure than China and India."
But delegates saw significant obstacles ahead, including an almost complete ignorance of mutual funds among Indonesians, high-yielding bank deposits that lure domestic savings away from Jakarta's illiquid stock market, and restrictions on foreign investment.
Although Indonesian pension funds hold nearly US$2.4 billion they are prohibited from investing overseas, prompting some foreign fund managers to question the benefits of establishing Indonesian subsidiaries that will be restricted to managing domestic funds onshore.
But government officials made it clear that the purpose of the new rules was to persuade Indonesians to invest at home to spur development of domestic capital markets.
"We want to enhance domestic self-sufficiency. That is why you can only invest in Indonesian securities or new offerings," said Iwan Pontjowinoto, president director of P.T. Danareksa Fund Management, a state-controlled finance company that launched the first of the new open funds.
"We want to have local funds that can help the government by investing in the stock market," he said.
The new funds can only invest in domestic securities and are prohibited from selling more than one percent of their shares or units to any one investor, ensuring a wide investor base.
The new rules also ensure the funds are broadly invested, prohibiting them from spending more than 10 percent of their net asset value on any one company or buying securities representing more than five percent of the issuer's paid-up capital.
The conference, which attracted about 40 delegates from fund management companies, law firms, rating agencies and fund custodians around Asia, ended on Wednesday with a workshop on how to structure and price mutual funds.
