Zero tax and limited regulation are luring billions of dollars into offshore mutual funds, spurring a growth industry in famed tax-free locations such as the Cayman Islands, according to a mutual fund legal expert.
"I think every indication is that the offshore part of the mutual fund industry will grow. In the offshore jurisdiction you have no taxation and a more appropriate level of regulation as a rule of thumb," said Anthony Travers, senior partner at Maples and Calder in Hong Kong.
Anecdotal evidence suggests these advantages have drawn nearly US$900 billion into offshore mutual funds so far out of an entire industry sometimes valued at US$5 trillion, he said.
A lack of professional infrastructure is often a compelling disincentive to authorising funds in countries offering the greatest returns, while high taxation levels deter mutual funds from setting up in promising developed markets, he said on Friday.
The alternative is to authorise the fund in an offshore region, avoiding tax while reaching into some of the world's most rewarding investment regions.
There are, however, drawbacks.
"If you go offshore and you invest into the onshore jurisdiction from your mutual funds, you have things like withholding tax and tax treatments that may be imposed on your profits, and marketing is very much an issue," Travers said.
Certain double tax treaty networks can allow investors to avoid some onshore tax requirements, but these treaties vary from country to country, as do marketing restrictions, he said. For example, offshore mutual funds are prevented from marketing to more than 100 investors in the United States, while the United Kingdom prohibits marketing of offshore retail mutual funds unless they are based in designated jurisdictions, such as Bermuda, Jersey and Guernsey.
It is possible to market a Cayman Islands-registered mutual fund in the United Kingdom, but only as a private placement and not as a retail fund, Travers said.
Despite their obvious benefits, Travers warned that investing in offshore mutual funds is not for everyone.
The lack of regulation gives greater flexibility in the establishment and administration of mutual funds but it also provides little recourse for unsophisticated retail investors, which partly explains why these funds cannot be marketed freely in the United States or the United Kingdom.
"You are essentially talking about mutual funds which are established by institutions for other institutions or very high net worth and sophisticated individuals, in which case it is felt additional layers of regulation are not appropriate or necessary," he said.
It is possible to market offshore retail funds in Europe, but funds must meet the requirements of the "Undertakings of Collective Investment and Transfer of Securities" (UCITS) directive, which ensures certain standards are met.
"They are supposed to be able to sell UCITS cross-border in Europe but in fact the European Union is still something of a myth when it comes to cross-border marketing," Travers said.
"And you find in these jurisdictions commensurately higher fees. Three to six basis points on net asset value is the price you pay to market to the retail sector," he said.
