NatWest Markets, the investment banking arm of National Westminster Bank, said on Tuesday it had agreed to buy out Wheelock and Company Ltd's stake in their 50-50 joint venture, Wheelock NatWest.
The announcement ends a short and bumpy association between one of the world's biggest banks and Wheelock, a Hong Kong-based conglomerate led by Peter Woo Kwong-Ching, one of the leading candidates for the post of chief executive following Hong Kong's return to Chinese sovereignty next year.
NatWest Markets said recent trading scandals around the world have made it more difficult for joint ventures to operate under British rules in Asian markets with the highest growth, such as equity and derivatives trading.
"We did recognise at a very early stage that there was a certain amount of risk we could accommodate within the joint venture vehicle," said NatWest Markets' newly appointed chairman for Asia Pacific, John Howland-Jackson.
"We were perhaps not bargaining on a series of events around the world in a variety of traded markets that would cause such scrutiny of trading businesses," he said. "The whole environment has tightened up considerably."
Terms and details of the deal were not disclosed, but Howland-Jackson said both partners had contributed US$125 million in capital towards the joint venture before the shareholders went their different ways.
The move followed last month's announcement that NatWest Markets was pulling out of the fund management arm of the joint venture because of its acquisition of British pension giant Gartmore Plc  earlier in the year.
"I think that might have caused some disagreement between the shareholders," said Vincent Kwan, analyst at Vickers Ballas.
But representatives of both companies denied that termination clauses in the original joint venture deal signed in May 1994 were enacted.
Nicholas Sibley, managing director of Wheelock Capital, said his company had no immediate plans to replace the joint venture with another financial services subsidiary, but instead would focus on its goal to act as a bridge between China and the rest of the world.
"Financial services isn't the first thing that comes to mind," he said, but declined to elaborate.
Analysts warned that although the break-up will not affect Wheelock's earnings, it could signify a substantial strategic setback for a company with stated plans to diversify its earnings base away from Asia's volatile property sector.
"They've always said they wanted four major operating divisions by the year 2000 and financial services was going to be one of them," said another analyst, who declined to be identified.
"Now that the joint venture is gone some people may be wondering what the commitment is to diversifying the earnings base."
Some analysts said the joint venture had failed to perform as well as expected, and company projections of a break-even date by the end of 1997 were unduly optimistic.
"Investment banking in Asia is a very competitive market," one analyst said.
-- Hong Kong Newsroom (852) 2843 6441
