The architect of Hong Kong's currency link to the U.S. dollar on Wednesday defended the peg's continued existence well beyond the British colony's return to Chinese sovereignty next year.
John Greenwood, the author of the 1983 paper upon which the peg was based, said China must uphold the currency link to comply with the Basic Law, Hong Kong's future constitution.
"If (China is) going to respect and honour the letter and spirit of the Basic Law then it is going to be quite difficult to move from this currency system to anything else, and I think that has tremendous value in terms of stability for the future of Hong Kong," said Greenwood, who is now chairman and chief economist at LGT Asset Management.
Greenwood said articles outlined in the Basic Law require China to preserve key features of the existing system, such as maintenance of 100 percent reserves for the Hong Kong dollar float, full convertibility and the existence of private banknote issuers with reserves held by the government.
"In my view, unless the (Chinese) government intends to undermine completely the Basic Law, it will find it very difficult to depart from the linked rate system for the Hong Kong dollar as it operates today," Greenwood said.
Although the Basic Law is silent on the mechanism or rate at which the currency should be pegged, most proposals for change are impractical and very risky, he said.
Any change in the rate of HK$7.80 to the U.S. dollar or a switch to another currency or basket of currencies would reduce prized stability created by the existing system, while non-convertibility of China's renminbi would make any integration of the two currencies virtually impossible, he said.
"I would argue that in order to become a reserve currency, the renminbi would be required to be fully convertible with no trade and capital controls," he said.
China hopes to attain convertibility of its current account by the end of the century, but broad and deep capital markets will be required before full convertibility of its capital account would become possible, he added.
Greenwood also said the peg's ability to withstand upheavals, such as China's Tiananmen Square crackdown in 1989 and global stock market instability in 1987, suggest a speculative attack before the transition at midnight on June 30 next year was extremely unlikely.
"If for some reason there was political shock, then we might see some kind of speculation. But in the absence of that, I would not expect large-scale speculation," he said.
-- Hong Kong Newsroom (852) 2843 6441
