Guinness Flight Asia said on Thursday that the selection of Hong Kong's new chief executive next month could give further support to the territory's soaring Hang Seng Index, which it expects to rise to 14,000 points soon.
"Once the chief executive is chosen, the direction of economic policy after the handover will be clearer," the fund manager said in an Asian quarterly outlook.
"Since it is clearly in China's interest that the handover should proceed smoothly, China will seek to ensure that it does nothing to adversely affect sentiment. Investors are increasingly coming to regard the handover as a positive rather than a negative."
The British territory returns to Chinese rule on July 1, 1997. The chief executive, who will govern Hong Kong as a special administrative region of China following the transition, will be announced on December 11.
Guinness Flight is maintaining a heavily overweight position on the Hong Kong stock market, and investment director Nerissa Lee said she holds a three-month target of 14,000 points for the Hang Seng Index.
"Hong Kong has done very well and we're still very bullish," she said. "I think it will continue to do well for some time because money will flow into Hong Kong as the preferred market (in Asia) and will stay here for some time."
Lee said Hong Kong will benefit from the credit easing in China, which will offset any interest rate hike in the United States this year or next, with additional support from subdued inflation and a strong property market.
Guinness Flight is also overweight in China, where it expects company profits to recover strongly as the effects of the austerity programme ease.
"It's time to take a look at China," Lee said. "We are at the start of a cyclical uptrend."
She forecasts Chinese economic growth of 9.8 percent this year, rising to 10.2 percent next year, in a context of a carefully controlled credit easing that will be channelled into selective sectors and industries.
While exports are expected to recover from this year's weakness, China's economy will also benefit from an increase in investment and consumption, she said.
"The last cycle of growth was led by exports but in this cycle we believe it will be very much more broadly based," Lee said, who favours power, automobiles and consumer products as China's most promising sectors in the short term.
Huaneng International Power Company is her top power stock, thanks to an aggressive capacity expansion, while Qingling Motors Co Ltd leads the automobile pack.
Qingling stock is trading in single digit multiples, despite a 20-percent share of China's expanding car market that is expected to rise to 30 percent next year.
Earnings at Guangnan Ltd, an integrated food distributor poised to exploit a boom in Chinese supermarket consumption, could rise 30 percent each year for the next three years, Lee said.
Goldlion Holdings Ltd remains Guinness Flight's favoured retail stock, reporting an annual net profit growth of more than 40 percent each year for the past seven years.
"This is an excellent track record and proof of the quality of management at the company," Lee said.
