Hong Kong is among the world's most efficient economies but its continued success as a global financial centre and entrepot is far from certain, Harvard-based economic adviser professor Jeffrey Sachs said on Monday.
Uncertainty associated with the British colony's return to Chinese rule next year could compromise Hong Kong's leading position as the world's most competitive economy behind Singapore, said Sachs, whose Harvard Institute of International Development produced the Global Competitiveness Report 1996.
"I'm not predicting doom and gloom," Sachs, an adviser on economic reform to governments around the world, told reporters at the World Economic Forum in Hong Kong.
"I'm just saying that if you want to maintain a high-precision, finely-honed, world-class financial and trading centre such as this there isn't that much room for playing around."
Hong Kong will continue to flourish past the transition only if the rule of law is strictly observed, media freedoms are upheld and the economy remains completely open, he said.
But only time will tell whether the commercial underpinnings of Hong Kong's successful, highly-complex and capitalist economy will be maintained, he said.
"After Chinese sovereignty comes in July 1997 we're going to see whether the judicial system remains independent, whether the media remain free, whether there's ample opportunity for the full flow of financial and economic and political information that is vital for an entrepot of this kind," he said.
Sachs also adopted a cautious view of China's economic promise, warning that its economic institutions need drastic overhaul in order to maintain high rates of economic growth beyond the short-term.
"These institutions are not good enough to carry China toward long-term growth. China's dynamism now is undoubted and it's not going to come klunking to a halt, but it's based on the fact the starting point is so low," Sachs said.
Cheap labour, low taxation and access to foreign exchange along China's coastal regions have fuelled the world's most impressive exports boom, Sachs said. But in order for that momentum to be maintained, China must clarify property rights, develop financial markets and establish legal certainty.
"The Chinese government is going to have to run very fast and keep very clear sights on its goals in order ... for institutional change to keep up so that the goal of high growth can be sustained in the future," Sachs said.
A major obstacle to long-term success is the state enterprise sector, which employs 20 percent of the population. While it is not sufficiently large to submerge the entire economy, the state enterprise sector is a definite drag on the economy and poses a risk to the entire financial system, Sachs said.
Sachs lauded China's efforts so far to privatise businesses at the local and regional levels.
"Parts of China are reforming from the bottom up with local and regional governments making experiments in privatisation that can be models for the rest of China," he said.
