Foreign cash is holding steady in Thailand, hoping for economic and stock market recovery even though there are few signs of either so far.
"I think a lot of fund managers will be doing a lot of wishful thinking, but at the end of the day I don't think (Thailand) will be going anywhere in a hurry," Christopher Day, joint managing director at Thornton Management (Asia) Ltd said.
Most funds appeared to be neutral on Thailand against Morgan Stanley's widely-used Far East Asia ex-Japan free index.
Salomon Brothers said last week that research data suggested funds were neutral to overweight, while Nomura Research Institute said funds were neutral to underweight.
Thailand stock exchange data suggested a one-percent retail fund sell-off in October brought most funds into neutral.
"The worst should be over, both in terms of politics and economics," said Stephen Leung, BZW Asia's chief investment officer.
Investor nervousness has abated somewhat following the recent election of a new coalition government headed by the New Aspiration Party. But most commentators agreed the immediate direction of Thailand's SET index, which closed on Friday at 970.30 compared to a year-high of 1,402.81, depends on the announcement of cabinet appointments and new economic measures.
"There's a good chance we'll have a little rally back up to, say, 1,000 if (coalition leader) Chavalit Yongchaiyudh brings good people into his cabinet," said Christine Rowley, investment manager with LGT Asset Management in Hong Kong.
Rowley also said the SETI has performed strongly through December and January every year for 10 years.
"There's a very high seasonality element in Thailand," she said. "So we might see some little rally ... but I expect foreigners to sell into that and bring the market back down again, maybe even lower than it has been before."
Others agreed that more selling can be expected with funds assuming an underweight position while Thailand grapples with gaping trade and current account deficits, a slump in corporate earnings and a weak bank sector.
"Further market downside exists, though the extent of a decline will not be large," Nomura said in a research report.
Poor corporate earnings are considered the prime culprit. Jardine Fleming has reduced its corporate earnings forecast for 1996 to four percent from 14 percent, following a decline in price-earnings ratios to 16 from 18 earlier in the year.
Offsetting the bad news are falling inflation, some hopes of improved export competitiveness next year and expectations of better trade and current accounts on a decline in imports.
"Without the new measures, without an improvement in the current account deficit, we think the market will find it difficult to break through the 1,000 level," said Patrick Wong, investment director at Jardine Fleming Unit Trusts.
Wong is expecting some turnaround in the first or second quarters of 1997, partly because slower imports will ease the trade deficit and improve the current account deficit.
Most agree improvements in a current account deficit of seven percent of gross domestic product are needed before Thailand can turn around. But there is considerable scepticism about common forecasts of an economic and stock market recovery within six months.
"It's been six months away for a long time now. Lo and behold, the second quarter of 1997 is also conveniently six months away," Rowley said.
