Jardine Fleming Holdings Ltd said in Hong Kong on Thursday that clients should be reassured that revelations of front-running by one of its fund managers had prompted much greater emphasis on regulatory compliance.
"Clients must look at this going forward," Alan Smith, chairman of Jardine Fleming Holdings Ltd, told Reuters. "The important thing is to make sure you take the right action, and we've taken the right action."
A five-month probe by regulators in London and Hong Kong uncovered a series of irregular trades by a former senior fund manager at Jardine Fleming Investment Management Ltd, one of Asia's largest fund houses with US$22 billion under management.
The United Kingdom's Investment Management Regulatory Organisation (IMRO) and the Securities and Futures Commission (SFC) in Hong Kong said fund manager Colin Armstrong delayed processing deals, allowing for changes in the trading price. Some of the deals involved his personal trading account.
In addition to the fines, Jardine Fleming agreed to pay the disadvantaged clients US$19.3 million.
"This incident was regrettable and we've expressed regret for it," Smith said. "Clearly as a result of this incident we've conducted a major review and we have a new emphasis on dealing and compliance procedures."
The SFC said it revoked the registration of the chief executive at Jardine Fleming Investment Management in Hong Kong, Robert Thomas. It also issued a public reprimand to the company.
"The SFC is committed to maintaining Hong Kong's reputation as an investment management centre in which bad practice will not be tolerated," SFC executive director Gerard McMahon said.
London-based Jardine Fleming Asset Management (JFAM) was fined 400,000 sterling and had its authorisation revoked, while three London-based companies in the Robert Fleming group were fined 100,000 sterling each.
The London-based companies delegated fund management to Jardine Fleming Investment Management in Hong Kong, which the SFC said failed to facilitate investigation when misconduct was suspected and lacked an effective audit trail.
"IMRO's investigation has amply illustrated the danger of firms paying insufficient attention to the responsibilities that arise when they delegate business to another entity, whether in the United Kingdom or overseas," said Phillip Thorpe, IMRO's chief executive.
Jardine Fleming was taking it on the chin, Smith said, but he noted that the five-month investigation identified problems with only one of about 40 fund managers.
"I'm not seeking to minimise the seriousness of what happened, but I think it's important you're balanced," he said.
Jardine Fleming has appointed a new chief operating officer at JFIM and a new head of compliance. The compliance section is being beefed up and centralised dealing structures are being created in Hong Kong and Tokyo.
"I think clients will understand that steps have been taken, and these do include a significant beefing up in the compliance system we have in place," Smith said.
