Rival fund managers in Hong Kong condemned Jardine Fleming Investment Management (JFIM) on Friday and expressed shock at revelations of front-running at the British territory's biggest and most prominent fund manager.
"It's appalling that a leading, well-respected portfolio manager was profiting at the expense of his clients," said Gregory Neumann, executive director at Scudder Stevens and Clark Asia Ltd. "Any institution worth their salt will fire them."
Most fund managers, including major competitors, said they were stunned to learn of the severity of the JFIM's actions and stressed concern about Hong Kong's regulatory integrity.
"How could this have been an isolated incident when clearly there was a culture there that this was fine?" asked one competitor. "Why did one guy have to take the fall? If they're regulating properly they should fire everyone who did that."
A five-month investigation by the Investment Management Regulatory Organisation (IMRO) in London and the Securities and Futures Commission (SFC) in Hong Kong exposed late allocation of trades by Colin Armstrong, a charismatic and senior member of Hong Kong's fund management community.
The late trades, many involving Armstrong's personal account, allowed for a change in the trading price which Armstrong turned to his benefit, the investigation concluded.
Jardine Fleming was fined 700,000 sterling. JFIM's former chief executive Robert Thomas, who had earlier resigned, has had his registration in the United Kingdom and Hong Kong revoked.
London-based Jardine Fleming Asset Management lost its authorisation.
"I think the disciplinary action was minor given the severity of what they did," said one fund manager.
Jardine Fleming declined to respond to the criticism, but the SFC said it was convinced Jardine Fleming would function in the future as a fully compliant firm.
"What people are saying in the market, the scepticism they're voicing, is not unreasonable but I don't think it quite takes into account that these guys have really received the blast of a lifetime," said SFC director Deborah Glass. "They know their credibility is at stake. They know we will be back."
Another commentator remained unconvinced, suggesting that the Jardine Fleming incident was merely the tip of an iceberg.
"This is rife in Asia. It's rife in all emerging markets," said Gary Greenberg, deputy managing director at Peregrine Asset Management. "But Hong Kong and Singapore are no longer emerging markets and all of a sudden people are paying attention."
Glass said that Hong Kong's short regulatory history and relatively light reliance on "black letter law", or written regulations, should not suggest that its regulation is lax.
She also rejected comparisons between the Jardine Fleming scandal and that of Nick Leeson, the rogue trader who brought down the prestigious Barings bank through unauthorised options trading in Singapore last year.
"There is no parallel between the actions of Nick Leeson in Singapore and the activities of a fund manager in Hong Kong," Glass said. "I understand there is a certain symmetry but one of the enormous differences here is that the regulatory system identified the misconduct, worked with regulators in London and dealt with the problem, unlike Singapore."
The Jardine Fleming incident should serve as a reminder to all Hong Kong fund managers that a corporate culture of compliance is required and will be enforced, Glass said.
