Hong Kong funds are expected to erect "Chinese walls" between asset management and traders after revelations of unsanctioned trades at the colony's biggest fund manager, Jardine Fleming Investment Management.
Central dealing, a system that prevents fund managers from executing their own trades, is gaining favour in Asia after last week's shocking disclosure of late allocation of trades by one of Hong Kong's most prominent fund managers, Colin Armstrong.
"There is an awareness in the pension (fund) community that this is an issue in Hong Kong," said Gregory Neumann, executive director at Scudder Stevens &amp; Clark Asia Ltd. "I think this could turn out to be a positive for the investment management industry -- no-one will get hired going forward without central dealing."
Regulators unveiled severe punishment last week for Armstrong's actions, which involved delaying the allocation of his trades until the price had changed. Some of the deals involved his own personal trading account.
London's Investment Management Regulatory Organisation (IMRO) and the Securities and Futures Commission (SFC) in Hong Kong fined Jardine Fleming 700,000 stg, revoked the registration for Jardine Fleming Investment Management's former chief executive and cancelled the authorisation for Jardine Fleming Asset Management in London.
Jardine Fleming, jointly owned by the Jardine Matheson and Robert Fleming groups, also paid US$19.3 million in compensation.
Regulators said they were convinced Jardine Fleming was committed to establishing a culture of regulatory compliance, and that central dealing was one useful step towards that goal.
"Central dealing simply means all the people managing money should place their orders through a central desk," said Deborah Glass, senior director at the SFC.
"If a fund manager can run his orders through all the brokers in town it's very difficult to track."
Placing another layer between the fund manager and his or her client creates a Chinese wall, reducing the opportunity for a fund manager to manipulate his or her orders. Three people are involved the transaction rather than two.
Chinese walls are supposed to be invisible but inviolate divisions between asset management operations that invest for clients, and sister broking and corporate finance departments whose clients are often bought by the funds.
Jardine Fleming said it would have central dealing desks set up in Tokyo and Hong Kong by the end of the year.
Most major investment managers in New York and London employ central dealing, but a quick review of major fund houses in Hong Kong revealed that many here do not.
One of Jardine Fleming's major competitors said all trades were put through different trading desks dedicated to individual markets rather than a central desk. Another competitor said a new automated order input system would eliniate the need for a central desk.
Other fund managers warned that central desks do not eradicate the opportunity for fraud, especially if there is a culture of non-compliance among the organisation's dealers.
It would be possible for fund managers and brokers on a central dealing desk to work together to move markets in a favourable direction before certain trades are executed.
"From time to time people in Hong Kong have had trouble with dealers," the fund manager warned. "It removes one area but it opens up the door to another."
Regulators last week stressed the importance of a "culture" of compliance throughout an organisation, and said they would be carefully watching Jardine Fleming and other fund companies operating in Hong Kong.
"One of the leading asset consulting firms here who was, I believe, acting on behalf of several institutional pension clients, just called to reconfirm that the managers of those various pension clients did have central dealing," Neumann said.
"This raises concerns for individuals in any institution," said Esther Heathcote, vice-president at BT Fund Management. "They have to have regard for internal controls and compliance."
As a subsidiary of an American bank based in Australia, BT Fund Management is regulated by the Australian Securities Commission and the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission.
