Hong Kong experts helping Beijing establish its funds industry said Chinese planners wanted to use domestic savings to build capital markets rather than offer lucrative opportunities to foreigners.
"I do get the sense they are more keen to mobilise their own domestic savings," said Andrew Lo, chairman of the Hong Kong Investment Funds Association on Monday.
Lo had just returned from Beijing where he met Vice-Premier Zhu Rhongji who told him China would release a set of rules and regulations governing a domestic funds industry by the end of the year.
Lo said he also received firm confirmation from Zhu that Hong Kong's position as a strong financial centre will continue following the territory's handover to Chinese rule next year.
"And while China will continue to develop its capital markets in Shanghai and Shenzhen they see this very much as complementary to Hong Kong rather than as competition," Lo said.
He said he was convinced that China appreciates the importance of an active funds management industry in the development of a national economy with capital markets.
But China's dearth of investment vehicles, a product of its underdeveloped capital markets, and a currency not yet fully convertible will thwart foreigners seeking early access to China's nascent, but potentially huge, funds industry.
The immediate role of foreign investors will be to provide expertise to allow China's domestic funds industry to develop on the back of domestic savings, Lo said.
"While we would not anticipate immediate direct overseas participation in the mainland's domestic fund markets, we believe that Hong Kong is in a unique position to play a key role in fostering the development of the fund industry," he said.
A series of training sessions are being set up in Hong Kong under the auspices of the Hong Kong Investment Funds Assocation and Hong Kong's financial markets regulator, the Securities and Futures Commission, Lo said.
China is studying the feasibility of pilot schemes to allow Sino-foreign joint venture fund management companies to be set up to tap overseas fund management expertise, Lo said.
"This won't happen immediately, it's likely to take some time," Lo said. "Ultimately, they very much see an investment industry as a way to develop their own economy.
"(Zhu) confirmed his understanding that our industry is very open and international and plays a major role fostering development of markets and the economy."
Investors are already prepared for the moment China unveils the regulations governing the domestic funds industry.
"Once the rules are out, there are quite a few domestically managed funds waiting to start up," Lo said. Existing domestic financial markets and yuan-denominated bonds are likely recipients of interest from these funds, he said.
There are already about 70 closed-end funds in China with a total asset size of 5 billion yuan invested in projects, properties, stocks and bonds. ($1 = 8.3 yuan)
