Hong Kong business groups hit back on Wednesday at U.S. attempts to link China's most favoured nation (MFN) trading perks with how Beijing handles Hong Kong after it reverts to Chinese control later this year.
U.S. Congressman Jim Kolbe, leading a 22-member delegation from the House of Representatives to Beijing, said on Tuesday the United States will probably want to monitor Hong Kong for at least a year before granting China permanent MFN status.
"If MFN were conditioned or taken away, especially during the transition period, it would clearly have a devastating effect and make it much more likely that all the things we want for Hong Kong would not be achieved," said Mark Michelson, former chairman of the American Chamber of Commerce.
China currently enjoys MFN, subject to annual review.
Hong Kong commentators noted that permanent MFN, which would allow China the same tariff treatment as other big U.S. trading partners without an annual review, was unlikely in 1997, the year that China takes back Hong Kong from Britain.
"It's unfortunate. Were it not for this being the year of the return of Hong Kong to China, I think it would have been an opportune time for the U.S. Congress to finally extend permanent MFN status," said Frank Martin, the American chamber president.
"But it is going to be difficult this year. Many members of Congress are very likely to want to take a wait-and-see attitude."
Legislation on permanent MFN has been submitted to Congress but has not been voted on.
China, which argues full MFN status is essential for healthy Sino-U.S. relations, granted Kolbe's congressional delegation an interview with President Jiang Zemin on Tuesday.
Political analysts said Kolbe was committed to achieving permanent MFN status for China, but had tried to remind Beijing the United States wants to see a smooth handover in Hong Kong, where many are worried that China might impose repressive rule.
"Would a vote to tie MFN to the transition be a good idea? No," said one analyst, who declined to be identified.
"But to kind of use it one last time to signal concern while everyone knows annual MFN is going to go through doesn't hurt."
As the leading entrepot for China-U.S. trade, the Hong Kong government has always backed China's application for MFN status. But on Wednesday it declined to comment on Kolbe's remarks.
China's annual application for MFN status goes to Congress in May. It has won approval every year since 1990.
However, former U.S. president George Bush was occasionally forced to use his presidential veto to eliminate various conditions that Congress attempted to attach.
U.S. President Bill Clinton, who accused Bush of coddling tyrants in the 1992 U.S. presidential election campaign debates, de-linked the annual review of MFN from China's human rights record in 1995.
