An uproar over the sudden departure of Hong Kong's chief immigration official last July is expected to gather momentum this week, when the territory's top civil servant appears before a Legislative Council enquiry.
Anson Chan, the territory's popular chief secretary, is expected to resist demands by Legislative Council (Legco) committee members that she release confidential reports on former immigration boss Laurence Leung.
Chan's appearance before the committee on Wednesday sets the stage for a showdown between the Hong Kong government, now facing accusations of a political cover-up, and the Legco select committee investigating the Leung affair.
Committee chairman Ip Kwok-him last week threatened to use a powerful ordinance to slap Chan with contempt if she fails to unveil the reports -- statements which drew a sharp response from the government on Sunday.
If the committee uses the Legco (Powers and Privileges) ordinance to open the reports, "then it will have to be solved in the court", civil service secretary Lam Woon-kwong told the South China Morning Post newspaper.
At issue are two investigations, one an anti-corruption probe and the other a police integrity check, both performed before Leung left his post where he enjoyed access to highly sensitive information.
British press reports have since alleged that Leung was spying for China, which takes back Hong Kong after 150 years of colonial rule on July 1 this year.
Leung, whose daughter was murdered with a cross-bow in Canada four years ago, has denied being a spy. But a few days ago, Leung contradicted earlier claims that he resigned for personal reasons and announced that he was forced to quit.
The Hong Kong government said on Saturday that no decision had yet been made on whether to release the reports but stressed its concern to uphold the privacy rights of civil servants.
It also noted that witnesses before the select committee enjoy all the rights and privileges of a witness in court.
"If that witness claims public interest immunity in relation to any document, he is entitled to put his reasons before the chairman for a ruling," the government said in a statement.
Governor Chris Patten on Sunday reiterated his support for Chan and civil service secretary Lam Woon-Kwong, but declined to comment on how the government would respond to the committee's demands next week.
"Everything that's been done by the Secretary for the Civil Service and others has been with my complete support and endorsement," Patten said.
Political commentators said the Leung case had highlighted Legco's power to hold the Hong Kong government accountable.
In so doing, it has drawn attention to the sensitive issue of the future relationship between the executive and legislative branches of government in Hong Kong, and created something of a dilemma for Beijing, which has long argued that Legco became too powerful under Patten.
"The irony is that Beijing might find it extremely difficult to discredit Legco for doing the wrong thing now that the Government is being challenged on all fronts," political columnist Chris Yeung wrote in the South China Morning Post.
"But if it gives legislators a pat on the back, it would find itself giving credit to a body which it has decided to scrap on July 1."
