Asia can expect to see a long-term inflow of money from a group of huge California pension funds now on an eight-day swing through the region, Asian fund managers said last week.
"The very positive thing is they've come to Asia and issued a clean bill of health in that they've pencilled in large amounts that will come here in the next five to 10 years," said Richard Nicholas, managing director at Hambro Pacific Fund Management.
Representatives of seven pension funds with combined assets of $234 billion are scouring the region for investments, taking the opportunity to promote their home region to Asian venture capitalists at the same time.
"This is just an acknowledgment that this region is set for enormous growth and they want to be a part of that," said Christopher Ryan, managing director at HSBC Asset Management in Hong Kong.
Ryan said the fund managers' presence reflects renewed interest in Asia after the slumps of 1994 and 1995.
"We are seeing a growing level of inquiry from the United States," he said. "It would be fair to say the peak of activity was during 1993 but it's building up again, that much is clear."
However, the immediate effect of the visit, which includes Singapore and Taiwan as well as China, will be limited.
William Crist, board president of the California Public Employees Retirement System or CALPERS, said last week that the Shanghai Stock Exchange was too small and opaque to justify investment at this stage.
CALPERS, one of the world's largest pension funds with $107 billion under management, is expected to join other funds opting for private equity stakes in individual projects rather than buying up shares in listed companies.
"We'll see greater interest in private equity funds and while it's not something we find particularly attractive there will probably also be interest in infrastructure-type investments as well," Ryan said.
Nicholas said renewed interest by U.S. pension funds signalled an awareness that Asia was healthier economically than many suspected last year, along with the recognition that regional allocation of global portfolios would reach about 12 percent by the early 2000s.
"The recent broad Southeast Asian slowdown is, we believe, a quite natural early stage better described as growing pains," Nicholas said.
"We see Asia-Pacific as maybe one-third of the way into its emergence as a global trading power which could span 20 to 30 years -- and that's before fully factoring in China or the Indian sub-continent."
Over the past 15 years Asia has grown at an average rate of seven percent compared to an average of less than three percent for the developed Group of Seven industrialised nations.
While Nicholas expects Asia's average growth rate to decline to six percent over the next few years, the region will still offer a higher return than developed nations if one assumes a connection between economic growth and market performance.
However, improved knowledge of individual markets will be required to reap the best returns.
"In terms of stock markets, they are maturing faster, and foreign investors and investment bankers are becoming increasingly educated," Nicholas said.
"In contrast to the earlier bland and broad asset allocation, we believe that in future each market should be analysed on a more individual basis within the context of its own development."
