Economic commentators in Hong Kong are sounding alarms about the unbridled optimism spurring stock and property prices to new highs ahead of the British colony's return to Chinese sovereignty on July 1.
Concerns are mounting that rising price pressures could inflate a collapsible bubble on the assumption that China will support Hong Kong's economy through the transition regardless of any political disruption.
"The term 'moral hazard' refers to the apparently growing belief in local markets that there is little dramatic down-side risk -- as opposed to short-term volatility -- because ultimately China will suppport Hong Kong markets," Ian Perkin, chief economist with the Hong Kong Chamber of Commerce, wrote in a column in the South China Morning Post.
In contrast to earlier fears that political uncertainty could torpedo Hong Kong's economy in 1997, domestic confidence in China's determination to keep the economy stable through the transition is so high that an unexpected problem has arisen -- price instability.
INFLATION FORECASTS ON THE RISE
Economists are starting to revise upwards their inflation forecasts for 1997 in response to booming stock and luxury property prices.
"The outlook for 1997 is going to be less good than we thought," said Kevin Chan, economist at Salomon Brothers.
Salomon has raised its 1997 forecast for the territory's benchmark consumer price index to seven percent from 6.6 percent late last year, and Chan said further increases are possible.
Sudden strength in Hong Kong's stock market in the middle of last year was welcomed as proof of confidence in the colony's future under China, and evidence of an economic turnaround following an export slump early last year and three years of austerity in China.
But the optimism became concern in November when speculation emerged in the luxury end of Hong Kong's property market.
Citing anecdotal evidence, Perkin argued that overseas and domestic investors confident of China's commitment to economic stability in Hong Kong are rushing to buy high-end properties in anticipation of short-term gains.
The Hong Kong government has since strongly supported a set of anti-speculation measures by the Real Estate Developers Association, and warned it will step in if there are signs that speculation is filtering down to the middle or low end of the property market.
But economists said property price volatility would eventually stimulate overall inflation, even though it has been restricted so far to the high end of the market.
"This will not be good for inflation expectations," Chan said. "In general, people will expect the higher prices in the luxury sector to affect medium and small flats."
RENTS TO RISE 15 PERCENT THIS YEAR
Chan estimates an overall rise of 30 percent in property prices will translate into at least a 15 percent increase in rents this year, which account for 25 percent of the Hong Kong government's benchmark consumer price index (A).
Food prices, which account for 37 percent of CPI(A), are expected to rise by at least eight percent this year after holding steady last year.
Hong Kong will also suffer from its currency link to the U.S. dollar. If the United States raises short-term interest rates this year by 25 to 50 basis points, as many expect, real rates in Hong Kong -- the difference between nominal rates and inflation -- will fall to about one percent, Chan said.
Such low rates will propel growing momentum in both private consumption and retail sales.
China, with its well-documented aversion to the socially destabilising effects of inflation, has done little to stoke further exuberance over Hong Kong's post-1997 economy beyond saying it backed Hong Kong's currency link.
"There seems little doubt Hong Kong's new sovereign wants to see the local economy prosper throughout the year of transition and in the early years of its resumption of sovereignty," Perkin wrote. "It (is) probably true that it does not want to see the local economy going on a speculative spree that will eventually run out of steam and cause a collapse."
-- Hong Kong Newsroom (852) 2843 6441
