Investing in Asian telecommunications stocks is full of hazards as the region grapples with a general lack of sophistication and wide discrepancies in demand and regulation, analysts say.
Views differ greatly on the potential of individual stocks and countries, but analysts generally agree that telecom regulation is the most important determinant to future performance.
"Understanding the regulators is essential as regulatory issues were the main determinant of Asian telecom stock performance last year," Jardine Fleming said in a recent report.
Asian telecom bulls say the global information revolution, combined with the region's rapid economic growth, have swamped the capacities of state-run operators, forcing a confrontation between regulators determined to meet demand and monopolistic state enterprises anxious to maintain market share.
"Asian telecom regulators, usually under-empowered, have promoted liberalisation, often taking on strong political and economic forces," Jardine Fleming said.
So far, regulators have responded by issuing licences -- a politics-fraught move that usually diminishes the prospects of the primary telecoms firm.
This is acceptable in low-penetration countries with untapped demand, analysts say, but more dicey in high-penetration markets, such as Hong Kong and Singapore.
"This is why deregulation in Hong Kong did not really make sense on the fixed-line side if the new licensees could not access the lucrative IDD sector, which they can," Jardine Fleming said.
DEREGULATION DAMPENS OUTLOOK ON HK, SINGAPORE TELECOMS
Continuing deregulation in Hong Kong and Singapore, two places with a high dependence on IDD traffic, has prompted a negative outlook on Singapore Telecom and Hongkong Telecom, it said.
In low-penetration countries such as Indonesia and the Philippines, regulators have issued concessions to build fixed lines, giving contractors the right to receive local revenues and perhaps a portion of those from domestic long distance.
Because the new local lines stimulate long-distance demand, this arrangement fails to attract the ire of primary telecoms which reap the benefit, analysts said.
This has worked well in Indonesia and the Philippines, where new local fixed lines are expected to boost earnings in both PT Telkom and Philippine Long Distance Telephone Co (PLDT) rather than eroding their market position.
The situation is very different in the cellular sector, where major market players are complaining that too many licences have been issued as they lose market share to strong second-tier players which are aggressively undercutting tariffs.
Because of this primary/secondary interplay, Jardine Fleming said it has turned negative on Advanced Info Services Plc and neutral on Piltel. But it remained positive on Total Access Communications Plc.
Malaysia's Technology Resources Industries Bhd has been battered down too hard, the brokerage believes, and it has been upgraded to a buy.
BROKERAGE BULLISH ON INDONESIA, PHILIPPINES
Deutsche Morgan Grenfell (DMG) is similarly optimistic on the outlook for PT Telkom and PLDT, but it adopts a much less optimistic overall view of Asia's telecom sector.
"The Asia-Pacific telecommunications industry is undergoing a period of rapid transition from a relatively underdeveloped and protected industry to one which is becoming increasingly saturated and highly competitive," DMG said in a recent report.
An overall increase in competitive pressures is not being made any easier by governments' liberal approach to the issue of licences and the lack of any industry consolidation, DMG said.
"In an environment of increasing saturation and rising competitive pressures, EPS (earnings per share) will continue to come under pressure," DMG said. "We believe that we are already witnessing signs of industry maturity."
DMG estimates that less than 10 percent of the population in the Philippines, Thailand and Indonesia can afford telecom services.
DMG is positive on Indonesia and South Korea, but for different reasons.
Indonesia's lower telephone density combined with a restrictive and non-competitive regulatory structure are attractive, it said. In South Korea, a large middle class more than compensated for the higher number of phones.
"Although competitive pressures are rising, the combination of low, effective teledensity rates, a wide middle class and exceptionally aggressive capex and depreciation policy should ensure that Korea Mobile Telecom Co will continue to deliver above-average EPS growth rates," DMG said.
EVEN TOUGHER TASKS AHEAD FOR REGULATORS
Analysts said regulators have done the easy part -- issuing new licences. Now it gets tricky as new licensees demand better terms on geography, interconnection and IDD rights. Cellular licensees are also demanding more spectrum.
"What will be interesting to watch is how quickly these number two companies demand that they compete on fair terms with the primary telecoms," Jardine Fleming said.
