Hong Kong people seemed to forget politics and other worries as the tiny colony geared up to welcome the Year of the Ox, its last Lunar New Year celebrations under British rule.
With the clock ticking towards transition to Chinese sovereignty at midnight on June 30, Hong Kong's 6.3 million people took time out from hectic schedules for the Chinese equivalent of a western Christmas or American Thanksgiving.
Last-minute shoppers dashed through malls, record numbers of travellers flowed across the border to visit relatives in China and children threw empty red "lai see" money pockets at each other on Hong Kong harbour's Star Ferry.
"Kung Hei Fat Choi, may you be rich and make more money," said resident Ng Chak Kwong. "Everybody wants this to be a good year. Too many people worry about everything."
But the cheerful greeting cards, office towers ablaze with lights, strings of red firecrackers and little orange trees offered few clues to Hong Kong's real state of mind on New Year's eve.
This year's festivities were set against a backdrop of rising political tension after China's recent pledge to roll back some civil liberties laws following the handover, plans that sparked an outcry both at home and abroad.
The Democratic Party, the territory's largest party, collected 20,000 signatures opposing the plans while the international community lodged official protests with China.
Chinese Vice-Premier Qian Qichen said on Wednesday Hong Kong's return to the motherland would end "the disgrace and humiliation China has suffered from for more than 150 years".
Chief Executive-designate Tung Chee-hwa, the man who takes over from colonial Governor Chris Patten after the handover, last week defended Beijing's proposed changes as misunderstood, but few were convinced.
Patten, in a televised new year address, said he would leave Hong Kong with "a good deal of nostalgia, a good deal of feeling for one of the finest places in the world, one of the greatest cities in the world".
"I'm sure that Mr Tung -- when he becomes Chief Executive... will be committed to doing all he can to keep things that way," he said.
Most Hong Kong people seemed determined to ignore politics during the holiday. Four days of parades and fairs were planned, and spectacular fireworks were to light up the sky on Saturday.
According to Chinese astrologers, the coming year offers Hong Kong plenty of promise but obstacles as well.
Unlike Western astrology, where months of the year are grouped into separate star signs, Chinese astrology hinges on the year of birth.
That could mean bad news for Tung, who was born in 1937, the Year of the Ox.
According to the astrologer at the South China Morning Post newspaper, Tung faced a difficult year marked by envy and accident and he was advised to seek compromise.
"He is likely to be caught between Hong Kong people and the Chinese government and may be the object of envy by mainland officials," warned astrologer Sung Siu-kwong.
Patten, born under the sign of the Monkey in 1944, was warned about the emergence of a rival in mid-year and cautioned to draw a line between private and public involvements.
"He will need to overcome obstacles that can stand in the way of the glorious withdrawal," Sung said.
