A festive calm settled over Hong Kong on Thursday as people prepared to welcome the Year of the Ox, the territory's last Lunar New Year celebration under British rule.
With the clock ticking towards transition to Chinese sovereignty at midnight on June 30, Hong Kong people took time out from hectic schedules for the Chinese equivalent of a Western Christmas or American Thanksgiving.
Last-minute shoppers dashed through malls, record numbers of travellers flowed across the border to visit relatives in China and children threw empty red "lai see" money pockets at each other on Hong Kong harbour's Star Ferry.
"Kung Hei Fat Choi, may you be rich and make more money," said Ng Chak Kwong. "Everybody wants this to be a good year. Too many people worry about everything."
But the cheerful greeting cards, office towers ablaze with lights, strings of red firecrackers and little orange trees offered few clues to Hong Kong's real state of mind on New Year's eve. This year's festivities were set against a backdrop of rising political tension after China's recent pledge to roll back some civil liberties laws following the handover, plans that sparked an outcry both at home and abroad.
The Democratic Party, the territory's largest party, collected 20,000 signatures opposing the plans while the international community lodged official protests with China.
Chief Executive-designate Tung Chee-hwa, the man who will take over from colonial Governor Chris Patten after the handover, last week defended the proposed legal changes as misunderstood, but few were convinced.
Some of the families gathering for traditional New Year banquets on Thursday night said they would watch a televised annual address by Patten, even though the British influence is already considered virtually irrelevant.
The last New Year's address by a British colonial governor could provide Patten with an ideal opportunity to lambast old foes in Beijing.
"What he says has no effect any more," said shopper Alice So. "What he says, what he did, what he's going to do, the Chinese government will not accept. It doesn't matter whether he's right or wrong."
Most Hong Kong people seemed determined to ignore politics during the holiday. Four days of parades and fairs were planned, and spectacular fireworks would light up the sky on Saturday.
According to Chinese astrologers, the coming year offered Hong Kong plenty of promise but obstacles as well.
Unlike Western astrology, where months of the year are grouped into separate star signs, Chinese astrology hinges on the year of birth.
That could mean bad news for Tung, who was born in 1937, the Year of the Ox.
According to the astrologer at the South China Morning Post newspaper, Tung faced a difficult year marked by envy and accident and is advised to seek compromise.
"He is likely to be caught between Hong Kong people and the Chinese government and may be the object of envy by mainland officials," warned astrologer Sung Siu-kwong.
Patten, born under the sign of the Monkey in 1944, was warned about the emergence of a rival in mid-year and cautioned to draw a line between private and public involvements.
"He will need to overcome obstacles that can stand in the way of the glorious withdrawal," Sung said.
