The recent Asian tour by U.S. fund managers representing $234 billion in assets, including the hefty California Public Employees Retirement System (CalPERS), has whetted Hong Kong fund managers' appetites.
"CalPERS has this innate ability of raising everybody's blood pressure because they've got so much money to invest. Get one percent and you double your assets under management," said Stewart Aldcroft, sales director for Templeton.
But it appears Hong Kong fund managers might be waiting in vain for a slice of the CalPERS pie.
While expressing a desire to raise their Asian and international weightings, the United States pension funds clearly stated a preference for direct investment over listed equity.
"The amount of transparency that we would expect with the companies is not available at this point," CalPERS board president William Crist said of Chinese public companies.
His statement highlighted a significant problem for U.S. money managers seeking increased exposure to Asia.
Foreign access to Asian markets is usually restricted, partly because many countries fear the sort of economic disruption that widened current account deficits after the last wall of foreign money came marching into the region in 1993.
Hong Kong fund managers, pointing to research indicating superior Asian performance by funds managed from within the region rather than from outside, said one option that could meet everybody's needs is private equity funds.
The performance of these funds is private but believed to far exceed that of public mutual funds.
Marcus Thompson, deputy managing director of HSBC Private Equity Management, said his funds hold $560 million, virtually all of it contributed by U.S. pension funds and invested in small companies expected to list within 10 years.
"Over the long term you're likely to get a superior investment performance," Thompson said. "There's a discount for not being able to trade the stock."
Cesar Zalamea, managing director of AIG Investment Corp (Asia) Ltd, declined to reveal the performance of his funds except to describe it as "tremendous".
AIG is the biggest private equity group active in Asia, with $2.38 billion under management -- nearly all of it rumoured to be contributed by one or two very big U.S. pension clients.
Zalamea said AIG's policy is always to hire Western-educated nationals who know the culture and the players in the indigenous business community. Established in Shanghai in 1919, AIG also has long-term relationships with many Asian corporations.
"When these (Asian corporations) decide they want to expand and invite investors outside family and close friends, we are naturals to be invited because (they) already know us," Zalamea said. "CalPERS wouldn't have the kind of relationship."
But there are disadvantages to private equity funds, the most obvious being their closed-end and long-term nature.
"One of the key issues about investment is to have your money back when you're ready to have it back, not when those in whom you are investing want you to have it back," said Aldcroft, who candidly admits Templeton wants to manage CalPERS money.
Another fund manager warned that while many venture capital funds do very well, others do not.
"The risk is higher. You don't have an out. The trick is in knowing how to say no," he said. "If you haven't picked the right companies, how do you get out?"
