Growing numbers of impoverished women from mainland China are flocking to Hong Kong to work as prostitutes following a deportation policy that is driving away Thai and Filipina women, police said on Monday.
Arrest data supplied by the Royal Hong Kong Police show that mainland Chinese now dominate the prostitution workforce in the sex trade centre of Mongkok, and their numbers are rising to meet demand following the departure of other nationalities.
"You can see the supply curve in the figures," said chief inspector Jonathon Fraser of the Mongkok vice squad in Kowloon.
"We're getting two-way permit holders being brought in from China. Some want to come in, others are duped into it," he told Reuters.
Two-way permits allow Chinese nationals to visit the British colony for strictly limited short periods of time.
Working as a prostitute is not illegal in Hong Kong -- unless the woman is present on a tourist visa. Related activities such as pimping and soliciting are offenses.
The nationality shift in the prostitution workforce is gaining momentum following 1994 policy changes that allowed police to arrest and imprison prostitutes on visitor's visas.
Before 1994, these women -- mainly Thai, Filpina and Malaysian -- were immediately deported but frequently returned to the territory. Fraser said the threat of a prison term is now a powerful disincentive for many of these women to return.
Chinese women are taking their place in the countdown to Hong Kong's return to China on July 1.
Police said they arrested 1,026 two-way permit holders working as prostitutes in Mongkok in 1996 compared with 967 in 1995, 415 in 1994 and 15 in 1993.
Meanwhile, the number of arrests of Filipinas, Thais and Malaysian women fell to 106 in 1996 from 273 in 1995 and 1,196 in both 1994 and 1993.
Many of the mainland Chinese women are supporting families back in China, said Kate Whitehead, a Hong Kong journalist who will have a book about prostitution in the territory published in April.
"They go into prostitution for the money...and the families are very proud of them. They come back with money and the families don't ask any questions," Whitehead said.
"Although there are many mainland women in the south doing this there is a great of difference between what they will do in their hometown and what they will do in Shenzhen or Hong Kong."
Many of the women are from northern China. Prized for their height, slender build, and high cheekbones, these women are making what is, for them, an unimaginable fortune by selling their bodies in Hong Kong.
Police said some women allowed to stay in Hong Kong for only a short period of time try to work as many customers as possible, charging about HK$400 (US$51) an hour.
They take home about half of that amount.
"Some are seeing 20 a day. Obviously, that's a good day and they can't do that every day, but on average they're doing about five a day," Fraser said.
Many of the women are brought in by syndicates, paying as much as HK$20,000 for a two-way permit or agreeing to see 100 customers without pay to earn their passage, Whitehead said.
Many make their way into Hong Kong from Shenzhen, just across the border. Those with papers come in by train while illegal entrants pay a fee to "snakeheads" operating speedboats to drop them off at remote villages in Hong Kong.
Fraser said it's virtually impossible for immigration officials to identify mainland Chinese prostitutes at the border if they are carrying legitimate papers.
($1=HK$7.8)
