Pegged currencies are common in Asia, with its fondness for order and authoritarianism.
But to peg one's currency is always a drastic step with heavy consequences. While a fixed exchange rate might reassure foreign investors about currency stability, it can also prompt a slew of unruly side effects.
"What you ultimately sacrifice is your control over inflation," said Alan Butler-Henderson, regional strategist with ING Barings in Hong Kong.
Hong Kong, Thailand, Indonesia, Vietnam, Philippines, Singapore and China all peg their currencies directly or indirectly to the U.S. dollar, requiring all them to mimic U.S. monetary policy to a greater or lesser extent regardless of domestic conditions.
Most of these economies bear no relation at all to the slow-growth, low-inflation United States. Instead, they are experiencing high growth and a rapid increase in domestic consumption at the same time -- an ideal recipe for inflation.
The lack of traditional inflation-fighting tools is a serious loss for countries anxious to avoid any erosion of often hard-earned economic progress.
SERIOUS PENALTIES
There are other, serious penalties, too.
A lucrative interest rate arbitrage can cause real problems for small Asian countries with fixed exchange rates. Best described as borrow low, lend high, the most common arbitrage tends to attract precisely the sort of capital inflows most small, Asian countries dread: so-called "hot money."
Large financial institutions with access to the best international lending rates deposit borrowed funds into Asian banks offering much higher yields and, because of the fixed exchange rate, avoid currency loss when they switch out.
Higher rates offer bigger returns, which attract even larger flows of hot money that swell money supply dramatically. Attempts by central banks to curb money supply by raising rates can have the reverse effect, luring in more hot, volatile money.
Both Thailand and Indonesia are familiar with this danger.
One economist noted that Indonesia has offered one of the best arbitrage opportunities in Asia for as long as it has depreciated its currency by between three and five percent annually, but the returns were particularly spectacular last year.
Speculators and hedge funds borrowed large sums in Japanese yen at about 0.75 percent annually and switched them into Indonesian bank accounts yielding 15 percent -- or more when riots swept through Jakarta in the summer.
"In terms of cost of funds, when you take the currency depreciation of the yen and the mild depreciation of the rupiah into account, you're paying nothing," the economist said.
The problem became so acute last year that Indonesia's central bank was forced to widen repeatedly the trading band for the rupiah, taking the market by surprise.
"The point of widening the fluctuation is to impart greater uncertainty so that it's not a freebie," said Sun Bae Kim, senior economist at Goldman Sachs in Hong Kong.
Indonesia also ordered its commercial banks to stop lending on occasion, even though soaring rates and strong loan demand offered excellent returns.
THE THAI EXPERIENCE
Thailand, which pegs its beleaguered baht to a basket of currencies including the U.S. dollar, tried to turn this arbitrage to its advantage by setting up the Bangkok International Banking Facility (BIBF) in 1993.
The plan, much admired by Asian experts, back-fired when Moody's Investors Service downgraded Thailand's short-term debt rating, drawing attention to its foreign liabilities.
The negative attention helped to fuel rampant speculation about a devaluation of the baht, forcing massive intervention by Thailand's central bank to keep the unit above a 6-1/2-year low.
Under the BIBF, a number of foreign and domestic banks were allowed to borrow foreign currency overseas, usually in U.S. dollars, and then lend the money in Thailand.
The scheme was a huge success. Foreign investors, already benefiting from competitive rates, also qualified for preferential tax treatment and rushed to invest in Thailand.
"Without those tax incentives and the access to cheap loans - U.S. dollars are by definition cheaper than Thailand (baht) - those companies would not be attracted to Thailand," said Clive McDonnell, chief economist at Crosby Group.
BIBF flows were used primarily for long-term investment, but international accounting rules required that they be classifed as short-term. This generated a sudden explosion in Thailand's short-term external debt to 63.3 percent of private sector debt in 1995 compared with 20.5 percent in 1993 -- a situation that quickly came to Moody's attention.
Asian economists defended the scheme while acknowledging its risks. Salomon Brothers noted that Thailand's foreign exchange reserves of US$38 billion far exceed outstanding short-term loans of US$16.1 billion.
And Moody's rival, Standard and Poor's, pointed out that many BIBF loans are backed by foreign banks rather than domestic financial institutions.
"Foreign BIBFs are probably less vulnerable to shifts in investor confidence, because their parent banks are more likely to stand behind them should unaffiliated lenders withdraw their credit lines," Standard &amp; Poor's said. "Moreover, obligations of foreign-owned BIBFs are not a contingent liability of the Thai government, given their foreign ownership."
There is no question that the BIBF helped to lift foreign liabilities in Thailand's banking sector, but the underlying causes of the banks' asset quality problems were more commonly blamed on a weak property sector, economic recession, political turmoil and a gaping current account deficit.
Recent attacks on the baht were precipitated by concern about how to finance the current account following projections of a fourth-quarter fiscal deficit.
But analysts said the foreign liability created by the BIBF will probably provide further motivation for the central bank to defend the currency. And a sustained defence will require action on those asset quality problems.
"This means shutting down insolvent institutions and building the capital base of viable ones. The longer the delay in formulating such a plan, the greater will be the baht's susceptibility to speculative attacks," Goldman Sachs said.
