Central bank independence is not usually a hot topic in Hong Kong but the territory has been debating the subject with vigour just 19 weeks before its return to China.
Remarks by chief executive-designate Tung Chee-hwa stirred up a subject that raises blood pressures around the world when he said changes were possible in the reporting structure at the Hong Kong Monetary Authority.
Tung, who takes over from Governor Chris Patten on July 1 when Britain cedes control of the colony to China, seemed to suggest that at some point, the head of the HKMA could be required to report directly to the chief executive rather than to the Financial Secretary.
"There is now already a structure for the future as to who the head of the Monetary Authority reports to," Tung said, when pressed by reporters on Wednesday.
"As to whether this is the right structure for the future, that's something we can really examine."
Hong Kong's reaction to the comments was largely negative even though most experts acknowledge the HKMA's powers are much more limited than those of central banks in developed nations, where political interference is viewed with high suspicion.
"It struck me that one might want an additional layer between the chief executive and the head of the central bank," said Eric Nickerson, head of currency at Bank of America.
Politics, not economics, is driving the debate, said one economist. The HKMA's primary function is not to set monetary policy but to manage the Hong Kong dollar, which is pegged at HK$7.80 to the U.S. currency.
"This is just a political game," he said. "The HKMA is a manager rather than a policy-maker."
The HKMA has never experienced political interference in monetary management, said HKMA chief executive Joseph Yam.
"If anybody were to come and tell me to do something about, for example, unemployment or inflation or growth in the economy, I would just say 'No,' this is not my responsibility," Yam said in a speech in Tokyo on Tuesday.
The HKMA was formed in 1993 by merging the government department responsible for managing Hong Kong's reserves with the Office of the Commissioner of Banking.
With this as its primary function, the influence of the HKMA on the domestic economy is limited.
"I don't see the need to change the existing system. It seems to be working very well," said Ken Chan, senior economist at Nikko Securities.
Chan also noted that Hong Kong enjoyed excellent relations with the People's Bank of China, the Chinese central bank, which has repeatedly stated its commitment to the Hong Kong dollar peg and Hong Kong's continued monetary independence.
The lack of any clear advantage of change has led to speculation that personalities are at stake.
By removing the HKMA from the Financial Secretariat, the government would seriously constrain the influence of the outspoken Financial Secretary, Donald Tsang.
Meanwhile, there are reports that Yam will be appointed one of Tung's principal officers in his new Secretariat.
A Hong Kong government spokesman denied that Tsang's relationship with Tung was tense, and said any changes to the reporting structure at the HKMA was something to be decided by the government of the new Special Administrative Region of Hong Kong following the transition.
Tung declined to elaborate on his remarks on Wednesday.
-- Hong Kong Newsroom (852) 2843 6470
