Stock market gyrations on the rumoured ill-health of China's paramount leader Deng Xiaoping were welcomed by many Asian fund managers on Wednesday.
Although many Asian markets have regained much of the ground lost on Tuesday when the rumours hit, the remaining discount suggests any announcement of Deng's death will now have limited effect, they said.
"This place is rife with rumour," said Christopher Day, managing director at Thornton Management (Asia) Ltd. "By the time an announcement comes, it will have been discounted."
Some immediate reaction is inevitable, and it may not be restricted to Asian markets, said Stewart Aldcroft, sales director at Templeton.
But that response will not last, particularly in Hong Kong.
"There will be some short-term selling that will reflect the sentiment of the occasion, but ultimately an ideal buying opportunity will have been presented," he said.
Tina So, associate director at Schroders Investment Management, said Hong Kong is still trading at a sizable discount to other Asian markets at 13.5-times 1997 earnings.
"When you invest in an equity market you are looking for participation in overall economic growth and profitability, and the undertone of the economy is very positive," she said.
Generally, fund managers said Hong Kong could correct to 12,500 but stage a fast recovery within hours. The Hang Seng index closed 3.38 points higher at 13,106.32 on Wednesday after plunging to 12,933.98 when the rumours hit on Tuesday.
In Taiwan, Shanghai and Shenzhen, the picture is a little different, partly because these markets have performed so strongly in recent months, but also because of their direct sensitivity to political factors in China, funds said.
After reaching a six-year high of 7,687.18 on Monday, the Taiwan market dropped sharply when the Tuesday rumours and comments by central bankers prompted a bout of profit-taking.
While local investors expect to see further strength, foreign investors restricted to owning a minority share of the market warned a Deng announcement could signal more weakness.
"Taiwan have been coming up quite nicely, it's a bit overbought, and Taiwan is traditionally very suspicious of political changes in China," said So.
Thornton's Day said shares on the Shanghai and Shenzhen exchanges are also likely to take a tumble.
"It's a more direct concern, and an excuse to take profits," he said. "They've both got good excuses because they've gone up so sharply."
But the rest of Asia will continue marching to its own drumbeat, often ignoring major news and international market action in favour of domestic news and sentiment, funds said.
Compared to much of Asia, China has done an excellent job of managing the political risk associated with the succession issue, said David Semple, regional strategist at Peregrine Asset Management in Hong Kong.
While China, along with many other nations, has no formal mechanism in place for succession, president Jiang Zemin's prominent and clear leadership position has mitigated much of the uncertainty associated with Deng's death, he said.
"The political power has already been transferred. It happened a long time ago. So it's not really going to affect the way we invest our funds -- other than perhaps providing a very short-term buying opportunity," Semple said.
While some fund managers suggested the rumours were placed by market players keen to create buying opportunities, others said the timing of an announcement now made sense.
"It's come at a significantly better time than maybe a few years ago, and possibly even 12 months ago when they were lobbing bombs across the Taiwan Strait," one fund manager said.
Deng was last seen in public three years ago.
-- Hong Kong Newsroom (852) 2843 6470
