Hong Kong business groups on Thursday lauded Deng Xiaoping as a great leader but said the short-term impact of his passing would be limited.
"He was a great man. We are naturally saddened from a human point of view. But as regards business, I have to say it's business as usual," said Brigadier Christopher Hammerbeck, executive director of the British Chamber of Commerce.
The paramount leader won high praise from businessmen in Hong Kong for his economic reforms and for developing the "one country, two systems" policy which will prevail when sovereignty of Hong Kong reverts to China at midnight on June 30 under the terms of a 1984 Sino-British treaty.
"He was a great man of vision," said Ian Christie, director of the Hong Kong General Chamber of Commerce.
"The 'one country, two systems' approach to the transfer of sovereignty, at that time, in 1984, showed incredible foresight and courage."
Given his contribution, it would have been better for all concerned if Deng had been able to witness the Hong Kong handover of July 1, said Mark Michelson, past chairman of the American Chamber of Commerce.
"He made it a lot easier for the transition to take place," Michelson said. "At the same time, there has been a leadership succession in place for some time now associated with the transition. So...the practical impact will not be overwhelming."
The collective leadership now in place, led by President Jiang Zemin, has also been associated with the Hong Kong handover, Michelson said.
"So in the short-term there should be no impact, but in China one can never be sure," he said.
Most business groups declined to speculate on the longer term implications of Deng's death.
Hong Kong's South China Morning Post newspaper fretted over a possible power struggle emerging in Beijing.
"Although Deng's death is unlikely to result in a major immediate policy shift over Hong Kong, changes in the corridors of power in Beijing will spill over into the territory," the Post said.
Hong Kong's government-funded Trade Development Council said Deng will not be forgotten for his contribution to the territory's ascent up the world trade league tables.
"If one were to take a look in 1979, the year China began economic reform, at that time Hong Kong was number 23 in the world league of trading entities. Today we are number eight," said executive director Michael Sze.
Deng is credited with the open door reforms which transformed China from an isolated economic backwater to emerging powerhouse.
"That just shows the tremendous progress we have made during the intervening years."
Hong Kong trade, now valued in excess of US$350 billion ($44.9 billion), is heavily dependent upon southern China where Hong Kong manufacturers own and operate 50,000 factories employing five million workers.
The gradual shift of Hong Kong's manufacturing base into the cheaper labour regions of southern China transformed the territory into a service-based economy geared to China's economic emergence.
