As Hong Kong speeds towards its return to Chinese rule, questions are being asked about the fate of its largest expatriate community -- tens of thousands of Filipina maids, or amahs.
Hong Kong relies upon its army of Filipina "domestic helpers". There were 140,000 of them at last count among the territory's 6.2 million population, and many people are heavily dependent upon their gentle and kind child-care.
"The help is so cheap you may as well have a few sprogs (children) while you're here," said one British banker with three young children, two Filipina maids and a very pregnant wife.
The Filipinas' contribution to their home nation is even more important. Most of the women are supporting families, and their monthly remittances account for a sizeable proportion of that nation's gross domestic product each year.
The arrangement works well, but it could be under threat. Concern is growing that once Hong Kong reverts to Chinese rule, the Filipinas will be booted out in favour of mainland Chinese women keen to earn hard currency in wealthy Hong Kong.
Recent statements of support for the status quo by Chinese president Jiang Zemin and Tung Chee-hwa, Hong Kong's chief executive-designate, have failed to reassure those concerned for the well-being of these women, who face unemployment and an uncertain future in their home country.
"They have said the status quo will be maintained, but realistically there are going to be changes going into the handover," said Dennis Suico, chairman of the Philippine Association of Hong Kong.
"There will be a steady inflow of workers from the mainland. It may not be drastic, it may not happen overnight, but there is going to be change."
SUNDAY GATHERINGS
The dark-haired women -- many of them college graduates, teachers and nurses -- are known in Hong Kong as the sparrows of Statue Square for their lively Sunday gatherings in the downtown plaza of that name.
Huddled underneath the imposing Hongkong Bank building, spilling out from overpasses humming with traffic, perched on plastic sheets on the ground at the Star Ferry terminal, thousands of chattering Filipinas crowd into the Central district each Sunday, forcing police to cordon off roads and redirect traffic.
"We have to do this, we have to," said Maria, 30. "We work six days; on Sunday we have to enjoy ourselves."
Wedged tightly between friends on a ledge outside Central subway station, Maria said she came to Hong Kong in order to support her 10-year-old daughter and unemployed husband, who can no longer work after an accident.
"I send back 7,000 pesos (US$270) each month," she said.
The money, a small fortune in impoverished Philippines, comes at a price. Most Filipinas' lives are marked by loneliness and separation from the people they care most about, and their working conditions are often hard.
"My employers are so selfish," said another Filipina. "I have one day off every month, I have to get up at six o'clock and I cannot end until 11 o'clock. Please can you help me? Please help me leave here, to go to Canada or America."
MINIMUM STANDARDS
The Hong Kong government sets minimum standards for domestic helpers in a standard two-year contract, which requires free room and board, minimum pay of about US$500 per month and one week's holiday a year.
But the Filipinas said that many employers, particularly the Chinese, are extremely demanding within those guidelines. The government recently announced random checks on employers to prevent the worst abuses, such as bedrolls in corridors.
Competition is keen for jobs with Western families, who tend to pay above the minimum rate, give two days off each week rather than one and offer a food allowance so that the Filipinas can avoid a foreign diet.
But when asked what they find most difficult about Hong Kong life, most Filipinas cite the separation from family. Many see their husbands and children for just one week a year.
Their situation is unlikely to improve much. Suico said that after the handover on July 1, many Chinese families and businessmen are likely to prefer a Chinese-speaking maid for better communication.
A number of business groups also support easier labour movement between Hong Kong and the rest of China, but government officials are on the record as having expressed concern about how best to handle the immigration implications of the handover.
Suico said the Filipinas are probably in a good position with younger families where both parents work and want their children to grow up speaking both Cantonese and English.
"And if you add to that the considerable numbers of the expatriate community here in Hong Kong, the senior executives, I think there is an overwhelming preference for an English-speaking domestic helper at home," he said.
But the number of expatriates on luxury packages is dwindling and the demand for domestic helpers is on the decline.
Filipinas are starting to ask where they should go next.
WHERE TO GO NEXT?
There is a huge migrant workforce of four million Filipinos the world over, most of them in the Middle East, but the case of Sarah Balabagan has confirmed that region as a potentially dangerous place for female workers.
Balabagan, 15, was convicted of murder in the United Arab Emirates after she stabbed to death an 84-year-old employer trying to rape her. "The Middle East is not a good option for Filipinas," said Suico.
Instead, they are being encouraged to look for work in the affluent and emerging societies of Asia, such as Japan, Singapore, South Korea and Malaysia.
