Blink and you missed it.
The much anticipated correction in Hong Kong stocks on Thursday on news of the death of China's paramount leader Deng Xiaoping gave fund managers all of 10 minutes to do some much-anticipated bargain hunting.
"This was not my expectation," said Ambrose Chang, chief investment officer at Daiwa Capital Management in Hong Kong.
Traders and fund managers said a huge bout of short-covering was responsible for the quick recovery on Thursday.
"It was futures driven," said one fund manager. "The hedge funds came in and covered their positions and there were a lot of angry fund managers in London being woken up in the middle of the night by their brokers."
After dipping 92 points at the opening, the Hang Seng index surged 305.01 points or 2.33 percent to close at 13,411.33 while the February index future ended 405 points higher at 13,485.
"The futures tried to open lower but there was no follow-through selling. All of a sudden they (the hedge funds) knew they were in trouble," one head trader said.
Clearly, it was the foreign funds, not the local punters, who got caught out.
"This news was in the market the whole week with certain people," said the head trader at one local house. "I knew there was a massive short position in the market and after the first minute of trading, I wasn't at all surprised by what happened."
Now that the dust has settled, fund managers are offering routine explanations for their near-term forecasts for the Hang Seng, all of them variations on the theme of a range-trade between 13,000 and 13,800.
U.S. interest rates and upcoming corporate earnings are expected to dictate direction, but most market players are expecting consolidation at current levels.
There were few reports of so-called "top-slicing," or rotation of funds into other markets, although traders did report profit-taking in Singapore and Indonesia, both of which fell over the course of the week after recent strength.
Some funds said they had began cutting heavily overweight positions in Hong Kong when the Hang Seng hit 14,000 on January 16 and any further rotation is not justified given this week's strength.
Last week's action also proved the independence of Asian stocks, which were either unchanged or weaker on domestic factors when the Deng news hit.
"They're all completely sucked into their own things," one trader said.
Although individual factors helped push many indices lower through the region last week, traders and funds confirmed reports that institutional money was moving out of Asia and into Latin America.
"They can't find anything in Asia to buy," said one head trader. "In Singapore and Malaysia, the earnings growth isn't massive and elsewhere it's not great. (Investors) expect better value in Latin America."
One foreign fund manager said the flows were understandable given that Latin America is trading at about 12 percent earnings growth on a multiple of 11.5 times - 20 percent below the average Asian earnings multiple.
"And Southeast Asia is still going through this adjustment," he said.
"Global asset allocators still look at Asia as a region suffering from cost overruns, squeezed margins and, in some industries, a lack of pricing power."
