Now that China's Deng Xiaoping is dead, Hong Kong faces a future without the figurehead who helped to assure the territory's confidence and stability, among the two most important words in the investor's lexicon.
As the architect of the "One country, two systems" policy, Deng provided the framework that will guide Hong Kong's return to China on July 1 this year.
His open-door policy also transformed the territory's economy from an industrial and manufacturing hub into a service centre geared to China's emergence.
Deng's passing last week was an important milestone for the city-state he helped to shape.
The immediate impact of his death would be small, as the paramount leader's nuts-and-bolts involvement in Hong Kong affairs was limited.
But the longer term effect would be significant, particularly as Hong Kong prepared for its July 1 transition into a Special Administrative Region (SAR) of China, after more than 150 years of British colonial rule.
"To all intents and purposes, he was inactive but while he was there, his standing allowed large numbers of people to move and shake on the basis of his authority," said David Dodwell, author and director at Jardine Fleming Holdings.
"That is the biggest imponderable: to what extent could the people promoting economic reform become vulnerable."
ECONOMIC REFORM TO CONTINUE REGARDLESS
Few doubt that the economic reforms Deng initiated and upon which Hong Kong depends so heavily will proceed.
Too much change has already become entrenched, and China's growing number of jobless will require continued progress as the private sector, most of it built and supported by foreign investment, is the nation's only job creator, Dodwell said.
That is a positive factor for Hong Kong, which has been the primary investment gateway into China. In 1995, Hong Kong accounted for $80 billion of direct investment in China, or 60 percent of a total realised foreign direct investment of $133 billion.
Rising foreign investment also would imply increased demand for services, which would at least guarantee steady economic growth, albeit at slower rates than 20 years ago.
"We won't see double digit growth rates again," said George Leung, economist at Hongkong and Shanghai Bank.
"I would also not see growth slowing sharply, to say one or two percent, because Hong Kong still has the backing of China. If China grows from nine to 10 percent each year you can imagine the demand for services in Hong Kong."
THE POLITICAL PACE OF CHANGE
The pace of reform -- and of economic growth -- has always been a hot political issue in China, as has management of the industrial sector which is dominated by huge, labour intensive and debt-laden state enterprises.
"There seems to have been a certain policy inertia. What will the next step be?" asked Michael Martin, economist at the government-funded Hong Kong Trade Development Council.
All eyes will be on China's 15th National People's Congress in October for signs of renewed momentum in policy-making and the collective leadership's commitment to change.
"As that new domestic economic policy and particularly industrial policy emerges it will have implications for what Hong Kong's role will be for the next decade or so," Martin said.
Hong Kong can rest assured that the role Deng carved out for it 15 years ago will remain intact for the time being, Martin said. China's absence of basic financial infrastructure, a reliable legal system or even property rights seems to assure Hong Kong's near-term future as the nation's investment gateway.
But as China develops, the territory's role could diminish.
"Its role over time is likely to become more modest," said Dodwell. "Over time, the mainland Chinese economy and companies in the mainland in centres such as Shanghai will become more successful and the economic centres of gravity will shift."
HONG KONG KEEPS WARY WATCH ON SHANGHAI
Shanghai is viewed with suspicion by many in Hong Kong, who fear its rapid economic progress and close ties to the current collective leadership in Beijing.
"Shanghai has for many years now been given priority by the Chinese leadership as they tried to rebuild strength there but I don't honestly see that those commitments to help Shanghai to grow, will be in any way at the expense of Hong Kong," said Dodwell.
Hong Kong's best scenario for the future will depend on a China that succeeds, but not too well, Dodwell said. "If China really motors and gets really clever, it doesn't need Hong Kong any more."
But Martin said China is going to need more than one financial centre, one port or one major transportation hub.
"Rather than a situation where they are competing head to head, it will be more a situation of how the two can complement each other for the overall growth of China," he said.
HONG KONG MUST KEEP LOOKING OUT, NOT IN....
Martin stressed Hong Kong's international role, partly because the world's trade structure is shifting more quickly than in the past. Production facilities are more mobile, flexible and integrated and Hong Kong's international exposure and expertise will remain crucial to China's success, he said.
"The future of southern China depends on its ability to respond to those shifts and reorient activities into new product areas, or move up the technological ladder," he said.
But there are other, more subtle concerns, including a common fear that China will plunder Hong Kong's coffers.
China has pledged its support for Hong Kong's monetary independence, but economic tzar Zhu Rongji in the past has made frequent pleas to the wealthy coastal provinces in favour of China's poorer central areas.
The price of plundering Hong Kong would be high, Dodwell warned. International investors have committed $330 billion so far in China, two-thirds of which came through Hong Kong. Actual investment from Hong Kong is over $100 billion, much of it from overseas Chinese.
"In theory, it's always posible but it would be a one-off gift. Is China really going to cut off its nose to spite its face?" Dodwell asked. "If it came in and scooped up the pot, what demonstration does that give to the overseas economy, and particularly the overseas Chinese economy?"
-- Hong Kong Newsroom (852) 2843 6470
