Hong Kong Financial Secretary Donald Tsang painted a rosy picture of an expanding economy on Thursday, just two weeks before he presents the budget that will straddle the territory's handover to Chinese rule.
With economic growth forecast at 5.5 percent this year and the trade picture improving, Hong Kong's economy is well positioned ahead of the territory's transition from British to Chinese sovereignty on July 1, Tsang said.
"Hong Kong will start life as a Special Administrative Region (of China) in sound economic shape, with every prospect that we will remain the most attractive business location in this region," Tsang told a Hong Kong Investment Fund Association lunch.
Tsang is due to release the annual budget on March 12.
He revealed the government's economic forecasts but declined to disclose its fiscal reserves or comment on an expected fiscal surplus of up HK$20 billion (US$2.56 billion), substantially higher than a prior government forecast of HK$1.6 billion.
"It makes good sense to separate clearly our economic forecasts from the annual budget," he said.
"To maintain our position as a major centre for international business, entrepreneurs and investors need prompt access to the best information on our current performance and our future prospects," he said.
Tsang said improvements in foreign trade and rising domestic demand would continue to support Hong Kong's economy through 1997, following a turnaround in the middle of last year.
Consumption and investment were the primary drivers behind last year's recovery, aided by an unemployment rate that fell to 2.6 percent and inflation capped at 6.7 percent, he said.
Private consumption is expected to rise still further by 5.5 percent this year, he said.
The massive airport construction project and public housing programmes boosted investment levels in 1996, as did private sector activity in building and construction, he said.
"The feel-good factor returned in the middle of 1996," Tsang told reporters after his speech.
While investment rates are set to fall this year as the Chek Lap Kok airport project nears completion, Hong Kong's economy should continue to leap ahead, thanks to an improving trade picture that will benefit from steady or high growth rates in the United States, Europe and East Asia, he said.
"We expect the economy to perform significantly better than last year," Tsang said. "The improved performance will be generated by faster growth in both domestic demand and foreign trade. We also expect confidence levels to remain high in 1997."
Exports of goods are forecast to rise 8.5 percent this year against a decline of eight percent last year. Exports of services are expected to grow eight percent in 1997 against a rise of six percent last year.
Although domestic exports should remain static, re-exports should rise 10 percent this year compared with eight percent last year, Tsang said.
Although private consumption growth indicates greater confidence in the territory's future, Tsang warned that Hong Kong was experiencing an increase in price pressure that would push up the benchmark consumer price index (A) by seven percent in 1997 from an inflation rate of 6.7 percent in 1996.
"That is our forecast at this moment," he told reporters. "It will be revised in the middle of the year... I think that seven percent is a reasonable estimate."
-- Hong Kong News Room (852) 2843 6441
