Thailand's efforts to boost market confidence by toughening up rules for its finance sector won mixed reviews from foreign investors on Tuesday.
Some welcomed Thailand's willingness to admit -- finally -- to asset quality problems in its finance sector, but others said Monday's announcement came far too late.
"This is fire-fighting," said one fund manager, who declined to be identified. "They should have put the fire extinguishers and the sprinklers in beforehand. And now they've doused the flames, but the damage has already been done."
On Monday, Thailand's central bank ordered 10 finance companies to raise capital immediately and raise provisioning levels to American standards of 115 percent of doubtful assets for banks and 120 percent for finance companies.
The moves followed months of speculation about asset quality that helped to shave half the value off the stock market while leaving the baht open to talk of a devaluation.
Fund Manager Templeton called for aggressive management of the problem.
"I think the central bank and the authorities need to take a very tough line and they need to be pretty active in the way in which they're going to manage this problem. Because this problem needs management," said sales director Stewart Aldcroft.
One fund manager said he was surprised the list of companies required to raise capital immediately was restricted to only 10 names. At least another 10 are in similar straits, he said.
Analysts said on Monday that only four or five banks would have to raise provisions to meet the new requirements, but most of the country's 90 finance companies cannot even meet existing requirements of 100-percent provisioning.
Thailand's willingness to confront the problem won praise from some investors, but most were unimpressed by the Bank of Thailand's tardy approach to a critical problem.
"We were frightened they would try to ignore the problem or gloss over it," said another fund manager. "Now they have realised there is a problem and they're doing something about it, which is positive. But it's early days yet."
One broker blamed changes in central bank leadership for the criticism. Previously, the Bank of Thailand was respected for its non-interventionist but pre-emptive management style.
"The bank seems to have gone astray in terms of its traditional role as a central bank," he said.
Another fund manager said corruption, a major complaint about the previous government, was starting to resurface.
"One of the biggest problems in Thailand is corruption," he said. "The way in which political favouritism occurred in the past has become apparent in the current government."
Thailand can now expect to begin a lengthy process of consolidation in its financial sector, with most of the activity focused on finance companies.
Most finance companies are heavily exposed to margin lending in investment banking and highly-leveraged in consumer or project finance, said James Wilson, senior associate director at Deutsche Morgan Grenfell.
"One issue that didn't crop up that should have, is most of the funding for finance companies is in the form of promissory notes," he said. "When the risk goes up, so does their coupon and the cost of funding."
-- Hong Kong Newsroom (852) 2843 6470
