Asia will suffer only minor damage from an anticipated shake-out in Thailand's banking sector, analysts said on Wednesday.
"That's not a very healthy market and it's not a reflection on any of the others," said Carmen Welso, banking analyst with ING Barings in Hong Kong.
But some countries could take some precautionary steps to prevent the same thing happening within their borders, another analyst said.
The Thai government's public acknowledgement that its banks and finance companies are grappling with a huge liquidity problem caused by bad debts, many linked to a besieged property sector, prompted tough new provisioning rules on Monday.
The country's central bank, the Bank of Thailand, ordered banks and finance companies to raise provisions for sub-standard loans and asked 10 cash-strapped finance firms to boost capital.
Many analysts said on Wednesday they now expected to see a wave of consolidation sweep through Thailand's financial services sector.
For example, Thailand needed about five finance companies rather than the 90 that currently exist, one analyst said.
"People are going to look at Thailand and say 'we don't want that happening here'," said a banking analyst.
Indonesia and the Philippines could follow Malaysia's lead and restrict property lending rules to avoid Thailand's experience, he said.
"They'll try to control property bubbles, which is what Malaysia did a few years ago," he added.
Most analysts said it was too early to identify obvious candidates in Thailand for merger or takeover apart from the list of 10 finance firms ordered to raise capital immediately.
But foreign banks with stakes in some of the companies already affected by the shake-out would feel some immediate pain, she said.
One example was Development Bank of Singapore, which owns part of Thai Danu Bank.
Thai Danu announced a merger with Finance One Plc over the weekend. Finance One is Thailand's largest finance company.
Another analyst said that although it was too soon to identify obvious targets, some of Asia's biggest banks would soon start cherry-picking their way through the debris in Thailand, looking for possible takeover targets.
Citibank, HSBC Holdings Plc and ING Barings were considered likely buyers, although foreign restrictions could be a disincentive. Foreigners are restricted to holding only 25 percent of banks or finance companies, effectively preventing them from gaining control.
"I think they'll be under pressure to admit foreign banks to take control of bigger slices of Thai banks and especially Thai finance candidates," the analyst said.
But Thailand was in a relatively good position to confront these problems, with the economy forecast to grow about 6.5 percent this year, he said.
"Unlike Japan, they don't have economic contraction," he said. "My guess is if they shift their seat they can get out of it fairly quickly. They're not going to persist for four or five years like the banking problem in Japan."
-- Hong Kong bureau (852) 2843 6470
