World bankers and economic chiefs held Hong Kong up as a financial showcase with a rosy future on Friday, but a clash of views between Britain and China over democracy augured a politically bumpy ride.
Speaker after speaker at a one-day International Monetary Fund (IMF) meeting stressed the importance of the economic policies that allowed Hong Kong to transform itself from an isolated island in the South China Sea into a teeming metropolis dedicated to wealth, prosperity and commerce.
"The policy framework in Hong Kong now and after the transition of sovereignty could hardly be better," IMF managing director Michel Camdessus said in his closing remarks.
And instead of a list of recommendations wrapping up the day's discussion of the difficulties hampering Asia's economic emergence, the day ended with a challenge from Hong Kong Monetary Authority chief Joseph Yam to return after the British-ruled territory returns to China on July 1.
Yam asked delegates to attend the World Bank/IMF annual meeting in September to see for themselves that the "one country, two systems" policy guiding Hong Kong's transition to China was actually working.
"You will be able to see for yourselves that the dynamism of Hong Kong has not and will not change," Yam said, adding that the IMF's decision to hold its 1997 annual meeting in Hong Kong was "a resounding vote of confidence" in its future.
The IMF meeting will be the first major gathering of world leaders in Hong Kong following China's takeover.
More than 50,000 delegates are expected at a venue still under construction. Encased in bamboo scaffolding, Hong Kong's new convention centre only recently gained a partial roof, testament to the territory's speedy construction methods.
The meeting is expected to provide China with a showcase for the handover, which was evident in less obvious ways at Friday's IMF gathering, too.
Departing colonial governor Chris Patten started the day with a sideswipe at Beijing, telling delegates that Hong Kong's economic success was due largely to its increasingly democratic government.
"The government has responded (positively) to that process and to the changes in aspirations which have accompanied it, by welcoming ever wider public participation in the process of government," Patten said.
Tung Chee-hwa, the territory's incoming chief executive, ended the day with a reminder of traditional Chinese values of cooperation.
"Within our community of Asian countries we must forge cooperation through dialogue and understanding," he said in closing remarks.
To help foster this mood of cooperation, Tung pledged to visit his Asian neighbours soon.
"As soon as possible, I hope to be able to visit our neighbours in Asia to extend my hand of friendship and cooperation."
Yam cemented the day's upbeat handover theme with a reminder that, in economic terms, the "one country, two systems" policy was little more than maintenance of the status quo.
"Under these arrangements there will be one country, two currencies, two monetary systems and two monetary authorities which are to be mutually independent," he said.
"These arrangements are admittedly new but definitely not as novel and complex as EMU (European Monetary Union) with one currency for many countries," he added.
But as a reminder that things are changing irrevocably after 150 years of British rule, many of Hong Kong's colonial administrators were on their way home after seeing their careers cut short by "localisation".
Many expatriates were sailing on two of the world's greatest cruise liners, the QE2 and the Oriana, a dramatic reminder that an era is ending and that Hong Kong itself will soon be sailing in uncharted waters.
