Thailand's banking sector crisis brought repeated calls for an upgrade of Asia's immature financial infrastructure at an International Monetary Fund-Hong Kong Monetary Authority meeting on Friday.
"Asia needs a stronger, more dynamic financial infrastructure," IMF managing director Michel Camdessus told the conference on financial integration in Asia.
The region's banking system has not kept pace with its economic development, and the speedy pace of economic reform has created an urgent need for an overhaul, delegates said.
"In many countries, in Asia and elsewhere, prudential regulation and supervision have not kept pace with the new complexities of the banking business," Camdessus said.
"If left unaddressed, this gap could pose dangers for domestic and external stability. Indeed, all countries must be vigilant about the strength of their banking systems, so that the monetary authorities can tighten policy when needed, without fear of aggravating banking sector problems."
Asset quality problems forced Thailand to intervene earlier this week to demand better provisioning by its banks. Thailand was hampered in dealing with the situation by its monetary policy. Its currency, the baht, is pegged to a basket of currencies dominated by the dollar, but was under pressure from speculators who were encouraged by Thailand's poor economic picture and weak financial sector.
Lower rates would have eased liquidity -- but would also have lowered the cost of borrowing for currency speculators.
Higher interest rates to ward off the speculators would have increased the cost of borrowing for the cash-strapped banks.
While most speakers stopped short of calling for regional banking regulation and supervision to prevent the same situation occurring elsewhere -- an idea mooted by Australia recently -- some experts recommended frequent and regular gatherings of central bankers and finance ministers.
"Most countries need to take steps to strengthen the official supervisory oversight of financial institutions and markets," said Gerald Corrigan, managing director at Goldman Sachs and a former president of the New York and member of the Federal Open Market Committee.
Key to the debate are capital inflows, which have widened current account deficits across Asia with serious implications for external balances and interest rates.
Corrigan warned that while many Asian nations with wide current account deficits have taken comfort from large foreign exchange reserves, the capital inflows responsible for much of their foreign exchange can evaporate overnight.
"Deregulation has also led to a greater exposure of credit and foreign exchange risk, and increased the danger of banks being inadequately capitalised with consequent incentives to offer above-market interest rates and engage in less prudent lending," said Mahmood Pradhan, a senior economist with the IMF.
The situation is becoming more urgent as more and more nations in the region seek financing for the sort of huge infrastructure projects on which their future depends, he said.
"The challenge is for many of these countries to address their infrastructure needs, including environmental requirements, without putting undue strains on public finances or on external positions," Pradhan said.
Although many Asian nations have successfully raised capital through privatisations, the amount of capital raised through privatisation in Asia was relatively small compared with Latin America, he said.
