Foreign investors seeking access to China could consider the road industry, which needs more than US$6 billion in foreign money to complete four national highways by 2000, SBC Warburg said.
Low rates of investment are considered largely responsible for clogged highways in China, where 1,500 counties and 190,000 villages had no road access at the end of 1994.
Road building has not kept pace with the growth in civilian vehicles, which has risen a compound 13.4 percent each year between 1978 and 1995 -- roughly in line with the country's rapid economic expansion.
By comparison, the total length of highways over the same period has increased only by an average 1.6 percent a year.
"The main reason behind this slow development in China's highway network is the insufficient investment in the sector," SBC Warburg said recently.
Investment is a pressing problem with China's ambitious plan to build a network of 12 national trunk routes totalling 30,000 km by the 2010, with the first four highways to be completed by 2000.
Total construction cost is estimated at 540 billion yuan ($65 billion) over 10 years, most of which will come from domestic funding, the World Bank and the Asian Development Bank.
"However, it is estimated that as much as $6 billion will have to come from foreign investors," SBC Warburg said.
Foreign investors first started entering China's road industry during the Eighth Five Year Plan, and the resulting investment helped to accelerate the expansion of highways 12.6 percent to 1.15 million km between 1991 and 1995.
Among the better-known foreign-invested higways are Hopewell Holding's Guangzhou-Shenzhen Superhighway; New World Infrastructure's Guangzhou Northern Ring Road, which opened in 1994; Road King Infrastructure, which signed its first toll road joint venture in December 1993; Cheung Kong Infrastructure and CITIC Pacific.
Guangdong Investment and Guangzhou Investment are also active players.
Most projects are toll roads, which SBC Warburg warned can be difficult to set up and operate in China. Central and provincial approvals are required and collection can be fraught with "natural" hazards such as traffic accidents and robberies.
"It does not seem to us, however, that such irregularities are damaging the investment merits of Chinese toll roads, if the investor can work closely with the local authorities on containing the leakage at some pre-determined levels," the broker said.
There are clear signs that China is actively encouraging foreign investment in this sector.
Expressways, tunnels and bridges are open to 100 percent foreign ownership and there is no limit in foreign participation in Chinese joint ventures on first and second-class highways.
Experiments with various types of funding sources and investment structures are being encouraged.
And, as part of the central government's efforts to promote a more standardised build-operate-transfer structure for infrastructure projects, it is preparing to offer a bridge in Wuhan for international tender.
"We expect the market to be increasingly open to foreign participation, as additional funding sources help attract more investors and reduce financing costs," SBC Warburg concluded.
-- Hong Kong Newsroom (852) 2843 6470
