Hong Kong's embarrassment of riches will take centre stage on Wednesday when Financial Secretary Donald Tsang finally reveals the exact size of the territory's surplus and reserves.
The magnitude of wealth lining the coffers of Hong Kong is one of the budget's last and most sensitive secrets following a series of official leaks during the past two weeks.
Speculation about the size of the surplus has also led to controversy about how Hong Kong chooses to spend its wealth in this year of great change.
Hong Kong ends life as a British colony on July 1, returning to China as a Special Administrative Region.
Despite an attempt by the government to inhibit budget controversy it seems certain that debate will erupt on Wednesday when the full size of Hong Kong's cash pile is revealed.
China already has been accused of applying the brakes to welfare spending, a key element of colonial governor Chris Patten's thorny relationship with Beijing.
Tsang on Friday denied any Beijing budget pressure.
"In formulating our expenditure programme we had not been overly influenced, we have not been affected, by whatever they called political pressure," he told a group of central bankers.
With a budget surplus projected by many experts at HK$20 billion (US$2.56 billion), Hong Kong can certainly afford to better meet the needs of its disadvantaged, said the Democratic Party, Hong Kong's largest and most vociferous political group.
"It appears social security growth will be insufficient for our elderly and disabled," Huang Chen-ya of the Democratic Party told Reuters.
Spending estimates, already revealed, disclosed only a 9.1 percent increase in welfare spending in the coming fiscal year compared to a 20.1-percent rise in 1996/97.
But others say a tax cut is more appropriate, and might even become inevitable as the government struggles to comply with demands for fiscal balance contained in the Basic Law, the mini-constitution that will govern Hong Kong after July 1.
Still others argue that Hong Kong requires a hefty war chest of reserves in the year it reverts to Chinese control.
"The point is, now, whether the present level of fiscal reserves is adequate or not to secure Hong Kong from attack, from speculators, or from any shock to the system," said George Leung, economic adviser to Hongkong Bank.
"I cannot say whether that is enough, but I think more is better. Right now, it's 1997 and we still need money to secure the Hong Kong situation. It is a little more sensitive now."
Leung warned that either a tax cut or aggressive social spending in Hong Kong, with its nascent inflationary pressure, would be more destabilising than no action at all.
But there is no doubt that Hong Kong confronts the handover in robust economic shape.
In one of a carefully orchestrated series of leaks following 12 months of budget talks with China, Tsang recently told an influential group of institutional fund managers that economic growth will rise a sturdy 5.5 percent in the coming year, while trade and consumption continue to improve.
Inflation will remain capped at seven percent, and land premiums are expected to rise to a record HK$60 billion (US$7.69 billion) -- the primary cause of the government's sudden increase in its budget surplus and fiscal reserves.
Given this wealth, some question China's readiness to adopt the hands-off approach to future budgets under the Basic Law.
China was allowed to participate in the transition budget, but now must allow Hong Kong to run its own financial affairs for 50 years -- a doubtful prospect, according to Huang.
"This budget certainly has already the fingerprints of intervention," he said. "Certainly, I think the central government can, when it pleases, participate, to put it mildly, in future budgets by giving advice, invited or otherwise."
-- Hong Kong Newsroom (852) 2843 6470
