Hong Kong's hefty cash reserves offer a comfortable cushion for children born in 1997, the year the British colony returns to Chinese sovereignty.
According to Wednesday's 1997/98 budget figures, thrifty Hong Kong will confront its future as part of China with HK$330 billion (US$42 billion) in total fiscal reserves.
That works out to more than US$6,500 for each man, woman and child in the territory.
By comparison, gross national debt in the United States of US$5.5 trillion translates into a debt of US$20,500 for every child born there this year.
But Financial Secretary Donald Tsang resisted the temptation to hand down a give-away budget.
Instead of widely-anticipated tax cuts, Tsang's budget speech for 1997/98 (April-March) stressed the need for continuity in 1997, and Hong Kong's ability to work with China to strike a balance.
"Fortunately, our healthy public finances and robust economic prospects have made the task of finding the right balance somewhat easier," Tsang said.
But critics were not satisfied by the government's failure to spend more on the needy, particularly the elderly, while reporting a budget surplus of HK$15.1 billion this year rising to HK$31.7 billion in 1997/98. "I think the size of the surplus is utterly obscene and I'm very, very mad just on that," said Emily Lau, an independent Democrat and outspoken critic of the government's social policy.
"We are probably the richest place on earth and to think we have several hundred thousand poeple living from hand to mouth.
"I've got nothing against the tax reduction on wine, that's fine. But I think we should also do something for the elderly."
Tsang cut duties on wine to 60 percent from 90 percent.
Experts warned that the gap between rich and poor in Hong Kong is bound to widen as impoverished Chinese immigrants flock to Hong Kong seeking streets paved with gold.
In 1995, Hong Kong increased the quota for mainland immigrants to 150 a day from 105, mainly for family reunions.
"Twenty years ago, Hong Kong could absorb impoverished migrants from the mainland in large numbers because it had an immense need for cheap labour," said David Dodwell, a director at Jardine Fleming Holdings.
"Today, that is no longer the case. Now our capacity to absorb those in the economy today is much less than it used to be. We don't have the unskilled jobs," he said.
Hong Kong's rapid transformation from international manufacturing and industrial hub into a services economy geared to China's economic expansion has caused the relocation of virtually its entire manufacturing base into southern China.
Tsang's highly conservative budget indicated growing awareness of the potential ramifications of mainland immigration, with a 150-percent boost to spending on benefits for newly-arrived mainland children.
"As for the children, we help them fit into our schools with special support services and remedial English programmes," he said. "In 1997/98 we will spend a total of around HK$168 million on these children -- an increase of over 150 percent in real terms of 1996/97."
($ = 7.74 HK dollars)
