Russia is eyeing its second bad grain harvest in a row and will need imports despite a prediction by Prime Minister Viktor Chernomyrdin that output will be enough to meet demand, industry sources said on Tuesday.
"The sheer volume Russia will produce is enough to meet demand, but the quality is not," said specialist Andrei Sizov of the independent consultancy SovEcon Ltd.
"So it is fully possible that Russia will be forced to go to Western markets."
Chernomyrdin, in a speech to the Federation Council, the upper parliament house, forecast 1996 grain output of 77-78 million tonnes, "significantly higher" than last year's harvest of 63.4 million tonnes.
"This will allow us to provide the population with bread and bread products until the new (1997) harvest, to prepare enough concentrated feed grains and to increase grain reserves," a copy of Chernomyrdin's speech read.
But grain sources have said private-sector buying would still take place. "We have a shortage of first-class wheat," Georgy Zelinsky, general director of the agricultural trade association Khleboproduktprogress, told an industry seminar.
Sizov said piecemeal Russian imports of grain and flour in grain equivalent from all sources would rise to 5.0-6.0 million tonnes over the 1996/1997 crop year, from 4.5 million in 1995/1996 crop year.
Anatoly Manellya, head of agricultural forecasting at the Centre for Economic Trends, a think-tank set up by the government, said he thought imports could be even higher.
Agriculture Minister Viktor Khlystun has said Russia may import up to 4.5 million tonnes of maize and soymeal plus 500,000 tonnes of food wheat from the United States, Canada and/or Australia.
Zelinsky said domestic feed maize was in short supply, but maize for human consumption was not.
But industry sources said Western markets should not expect sudden announcements of big purchases. Rather, Russia would buy piecemeal in small lots, they said.
Sizov said imports of Western grain could be possible because Ukrainian flour supplies would slip due to very poor harvest outlook there.
"Russia has become the world's largest flour importer," he said, referring to imports which increased to one million tonnes in the 1995/1996 crop year, a rise of 25-30 times year-on-year.
Industry sources said the most likely buyers would be the dozen or so Russian commercial banks authorised to use U.S. government commodities credits.
Sources said Inkombank had used GSM-102 credits to buy up to 60,000 tonnes of U.S. wheat through Tradigrain for Russia's Far East for delivery to Vladivostok last spring.
Russia has used nearly all its reserves from the 1995 harvest, the worst in three decades. It survived largely due to carryover stocks from the 1994 harvest. These stocks were 8.8 million tonnes in July 1995 but were nearly zero in July 1996.
Sizov said the Federal Food Corporation, which buys for strategic needs including the army, had bought only 330,000 tonnes of grain by the end of September out of a targeted 4.5 million. September is peak buying time.
