Russia is eyeing its second consecutive bad grain harvest and will need imports despite a prediction by Prime Minister Viktor Chernomyrdin that output will be enough to meet demand, industry sources said Tuesday.
"The sheer volume Russia will produce is enough to meet demand, but the quality is not," said specialist Andrei Sizov of the independent consultancy SovEcon Ltd. "So it is fully possible that Russia will be forced to go to Western markets."
Chernomyrdin, in a speech to the Federation Council, the upper parliament house, forecast 1996 grain output of 77-78 million metric tons, "significantly higher" than last year's harvest of 63.4 million tons.
"This will allow us to provide the population with bread and bread products until the new (1997) harvest, to prepare enough concentrated feed grains and to increase grain reserves," a copy of Chernomyrdin's speech read.
But grain sources have said private-sector buying would still take place. "We have a shortage of first-class wheat," Georgy Zelinsky, general director of the agricultural trade association Khleboproduktprogress, told an industry seminar.
Sizov said piecemeal Russian imports of grain and flour in grain equivalent from all sources would rise to 5.0-6.0 million tons over the 1996/1997 crop year, from 4.5 million in 1995/1996 crop year.
Anatoly Manellya, head of agricultural forecasting at the Centre for Economic Trends, a think-tank set up by the government, said he thought imports could be even higher.
Agriculture Minister Viktor Khlystun has said Russia may import up to 4.5 million tons of corn and soymeal, plus 500,000 tons of wheat from the United States, Canada and/or Australia.
Zelinsky said domestic feed corn was in short supply, but corn for human consumption was not.
But industry sources said Western markets should not expect sudden announcements of big purchases. Rather, Russia would buy piecemeal in small lots, they said.
Sizov said imports of Western grain could be possible because Ukrainian flour supplies would slip due to very poor harvest outlook there.
"Russia has become the world's largest flour importer," he said, referring to imports which increased to one million tons in the 1995/1996 crop year, a rise of 25-30 times from the previous year.
Industry sources said the most likely buyers would be the dozen or so Russian commercial banks authorised to use U.S. government commodities credits.
Russia has used nearly all its reserves from the 1995 harvest, the worst in three decades. It survived largely due to carryover stocks from the 1994 harvest.
