Russia is flirting with danger in considering a freeze on domestic energy prices, a move which could prolong the oil sector's recovery and in turn slow economic reforms, energy analysts said on Wednesday.
Fuel and Energy Minister Pyotr Rodionov has called for lower oil, gas and electricity prices to help domestic industry.
Prime Minister Viktor Chernomyrdin, taking up the baton, said on Tuesday that President Boris Yeltsin could soon sign a decree lowering energy prices and freezing others, but made clear he was talking about gas and electricity.
Energy analysts said talk of frozen prices was ominous for the Russian oil industry -- the country's biggest export earner and the motor of the domestic economy -- just as the now privatised sector shows signs of recovering from a long slump.
"We could see a return to the situation we saw over the past 10 years, when low reinvestment rates led to the decline of the oil industry to its present state," said Vadim Voronin, an energy specialist at the World Bank's Moscow mission.
Price freezes would also annoy the International Monetary Fund, which wants domestic oil prices to match world levels and made industrial restructuring a condition of its $10 billion, three-year loan to Moscow.
"(A price freeze) would slow down some of the reforms and progress we've made, especially in liberalising oil prices," said James Bunch, oil analyst at Renaissance Capital.
Rodionov's predecessor, Yuri Shafranik, had said domestic oil prices should be capped at 75 percent of world levels -- their current level.
Domestic natural gas prices are still a fraction of their real market cost, while electricity is also heavily subsidised.
Artificially low prices inhibit adequate cash-flows, which in turn lowers money available for oil companies to invest, maintain existing wells and drill new ones.
Subsidised prices and low reinvestment were the key factor behind the collapse of the Russian oil industry that began in 1984 and has lasted to this day.
Energy waste in the Soviet era was rife, and Russia's new profit-oriented oil companies have little desire to return to the days of heavily subsidised fuel. In Soviet times, a glass of carbonated water cost more than a litre of gasoline.
With oil production 47 percent below Russia's peak 1987 level of 569.5 million tonnes (11.48 million barrels per day) and two-thirds of output staying in Russia, a price freeze would leave oil companies short of cash just as they need it most.
Russia is the world's third biggest oil producer after Saudi Arabia and the United States, and Moscow wants cheap oil to fuel domestic factories.
Industrial output, already half 1992 levels, fell five percent in January-July after a three percent decline in the first seven months of 1995.
The fact that oil is cheap means the export market is more attractive than the domestic one, but producers are unable to sell more abroad because pipeline capacities are stretched.
The government has promised tax breaks for oil companies, but instead is moving to squeeze them for more cash and force them to deliver more supplies to domestic enterprises.
Peter Houlder, managing director of CentreInvest consultancy in Moscow, said artificially low domestic energy prices would be "extremely damaging". "Companies are making their profit on the small amount of oil they export -- domestic sales now at best break even," he said.
