Russia's Gazprom natural gas monopoly plans to double exports to Europe by 2010, mostly via its ambitious $40 billion Yamal pipeline project, but energy analysts said the timing could be wrong.
"There's a market problem (with oversupply in Europe), and the cost of developing the Yamal field will be too high," said a senior European energy specialist familiar with the project.
"Europe is at saturation level for the next 10 years or so, so Gazprom is 5-10 years too early."
The Yamal-Europe project envisions building a gas pipeline network across 4,107 km (2,550 miles) from Russia's vast Arctic Yamal peninsula reserves to Germany via Belarus and Poland.
Gazprom wants to take advantage of rising European demand.
To help raise capital for Yamal, RAO Gazprom is offering American Depositary Shares as part of a plan to sell a total nine percent stake abroad.
"Europe can hardly wait for this project," said Alexander Litvinov, Gazprom's chief public relations specialist.
A company statement said: "The company faces significant requirements for capital expenditures."
The Yamal system, to be built in stages and linking with existing pipelines in some places, would have an initial capacity of 83 billion cubic metres (bcm) per year, including around 52 bcm to Western Europe.
Gazprom said the Yamal-Europe pipeline would boost Russia's export capacity to 124 billion bcm by 1997 and 154 bcm by 1999. Sales outside the former Soviet Union were 117.4 bcm in 1995.
The company wants annual exports to rise by 50 bcm by 2010.
Gazprom has won big Western credits to build European parts of the Yamal link into Poland's grid and Belarus, but it has not won financing for the main part of the system or to boost output at Yamal itself, which it hopes to begin doing by 2000.
Pierre Bauquis, special adviser to the president of French company Total SA, told an energy conference in the Kazakh capital Almaty last week that Russia had huge gas reserves but big financial constraints.
"Yamal is not needed before 2010," he said.
He said netbacks (a key indicator of profitability) on Yamal gas to Germany today were negative, "so Yamal is not obvious from an economic standpoint."
Gazprom sees Yamal as the goose that will lay the golden egg, since the area has recoverable reserves of 10,400 bcm, or 20 percent of Russia's total proven reserves.
But Yamal gas, some under permafrost, is in a remote area and is quite expensive to recover.
Some analysts say it may be cheaper to tap and transport Algerian and Norwegian gas to European markets than to extract Yamal gas in the volumes and time-frame Gazprom plans.
Russian gas already accounts for 60 percent of Europe's total gas imports. Russia has more than one-third of world gas reserves and 26 percent of output, and is the world's single largest producer, with output of 556 bcm last year.
Gazprom accounts for 94 percent of Russian gas output and transports nearly all of it. The firm wants output to rise to 820 bcm a year by 2010.
Russia exports only 20 percent of its output, and declining industrial consumption at home has left Russia with an oversupply. Europe is also flush with supplies, though demand is set to rise.
"The fact that Gazprom does not have its own financing for Yamal and that it has not been able to find domestic or foreign financing (for the main part of the project) speaks quite negatively about its economics," said the European source.
