Aluminium industry sources expressed doubt on Monday over whether producers association Kontsern Alyuminiy would be able to contain output to support sagging world prices.
"I don't believe they'll do it," said a Western trade source in Moscow.
A Moscow representative of the Krasnoyarsk smelter and two sources at the giant Bratsk plant said they had no information on plans to contain output.
"This is a very strategic question on which I have no information," said Bratsk-based Andrei Toropovsky of the plant's foreign economic relations department.
Kontsern Alyuminiy chief executive Igor Prokopov said Russian smelters had agreed to keep aluminium output at current levels and not to exploit at least 80,000-100,000 tonnes of idle annual capacity.
He and Vladimir Kalchenko, the group's first deputy chief executive, referred to weak world prices and unprofitable domestic smelters.
But the sources said Kontsern Alyuminiy had little leverage and was unlikely to be able to influence producers.
London Metal Exchange (LME) benchmark aluminium prices failed to react seriously and held little changed at $1,330 per tonne in early trade -- a sign that the market may have questions over what the Kontsern Alyuminiy plan means.
"The smelters tend to do what they want individually," said a European metals source. "I don't care what Kontsern Aluminiy says -- it doesn't affect my business."
Russia, with high electricity and freight costs and low domestic demand, is keen to see higher world metals prices. Aluminium is near 2-1/2 year lows of $1,305 and far below the $1,742 a tonne seen around this time last year.
A Russian industry source said profit margins on metal exported at average LME prices in the third quarter of this year were a negative 20 percent at Russia's Novokuznetsk smelter, negative 15 percent at Kandalaksha and negative 15-18 percent at plants in the Urals region.
Krasnoyarsk was breaking even, he said. Sayansk and Bratsk had profit margins of plus 10 percent. Irkutsk had 11 percent.
It costs Bratsk $1,127 to produce a tonne of aluminium, the source said. Freight charges to European outlets added $160 per tonne, leaving gross profits of about $110 per tonne, assuming LME prices of around $1,400.
"The Siberian smelters have a decent economic situation," said Ruslan Fedorovsky of Barclays Physical Trading Limited in London. "It's profitable for them to let the European smelters (with negative profit margins) die out."
A Canadian diplomat said last week in Moscow that Russian and Canadian government officials had met to discuss curbing Russian output, rekindling memories of the Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) between major producers Russia, Australia, Canada, the European Union, Norway and the United States.
The MOU, designed to cut output by 10 percent and draw down bloated stocks, began in March 1994 and expired this spring.
Adding to uncertainty was a statement by Oleg Deripaska, chief executive officer of Sayansk Aluminium, who said on Friday that he expected a decision on decreasing output.
But sources said impending Russian purchases of alumina, the raw material for aluminium, would be a better indicator of how much metal Russian smelters plan to produce next year.
"That will be the telling time," said one source, referring to buying that should take place by the end of the year.
Trade sources in direct contact with Russian smelters said they would keep an eye on Kontsern Alyuminy, but doubted it could influence the industry.
"They (Kontsern Alyuminiy) don't really represent smelters and do not have a lot of credibility," one Western source said.
--Moscow Newsroom +7095 941 8520
