Russia's Fuel and Energy Ministry, sitting on the remains of the once-great power it wielded over the oil sector, is struggling to redefine itself in the new market economy, energy analysts said on Tuesday.
The body, known as Mintopenergo, could once command that oil wells be drilled, helped to restrict exports with quotas and ensured that billions of dollars in oil export cash from the world's third largest oil producer went into Kremlin coffers.
Today the power to produce, export and plot corporate strategies largely lies in the hands of Russia's newly privatised, vertically integrated oil firms -- leaving the ministry to redefine itself in the new market economy.
"You kind of have to use the word castrated -- it's not what it once was," said a European energy consultant in Moscow.
Under new minister Pyotr Rodionov, a gas transport specialist, Mintopenergo may have even less of a say in the daily business of oil firms, which increasingly go about their own business and cut their own deals with foreign investors.
Oil companies say the ministry, as the guardian of big state stakes in them, could become a lobby for their interests in the Kremlin and less the long-arm of politicians seeking oil profits to top up the federal budget.
"Undoubtedly its regulatory influence has waned," said Alexei Gorshkov, spokesman for YUKOS, Russia's second largest oil company in terms of reserves. "We don't see it (their former influence) and, frankly, don't want to see it.
"But the ministry does explain our point of view on taxes to the government, and for that we are grateful."
Known as the Ministry of the Oil and Gas Industries in the Soviet era, Mintopenergo lost responsibility for what is today Gazprom, the natural gas monopoly, when it was renamed in 1991.
During Mintopenergo's existence, it has seen Russia's state-run oil production associations transformed into privatised companies, some of them with multi-billion dollar arrangements with Western oil majors.
Mintopenergo's brief includes coal and electricity. But many of its oil specialists have fled the ministry's Stalin-era building for lucrative jobs at investment banks and oil firms.
Even former minister Yuri Shafranik left in August to head the board of the Tyumen Oil Company, whose headquarters are in his Siberian power base in the oil-rich Tyumen region.
"The ministry is simply not going to be as important as it once was," said Matthew Sagers of PlanEcon in Washington in a recent interview. "It's going to be left with a policy-making, advisory, overseer role -- and that's a good thing."
Mintopenergo has a new challenger to the remnants of its power base in the form of the Federal Energy Commission, or FEK.
The brainchild of presidential chief-of-staff Anatoly Chubais, FEK wants to inject a free-market flavour into energy tariff and transport issues, although it is unclear how much leeway it will have. It is seeking to award access to crowded pipeline routes by tender, thus restricting the power of oil pipeline monopoly Transneft in non-operational issues.
Rodionov has said he plans policy changes -- but he has not revealed what he has in mind and has worried some industry players with talk about freezing domestic crude oil prices.
An aide to Rodionov said the ministry was foresaking its broad-brush "industry-wide approach" to energy in favour of concentrating on what he said were individual matters important to the Russian economy, like tax breaks for oil companies.
But one Western oil source said he was not so interested in what Rodionov planned, because the ministry had lost its power.
"Power has been devolved by default out to the oil companies and the ministry recognises this, which is why it puts its people on company boards," said Stephen O'Sullivan, associate oil and gas director at MC Securities in London.
