Russia's former fuel and energy minister, Yuri Shafranik, tried but failed to create a mega oil corporation by merging four privatised companies, energy sources familiar with the ill-fated proposal said on Thursday.
They said Shafranik's proposal, first aired this summer, to merge the Tyumen Oil Company (Tyumenskaya Neftyanaya Kompaniya), ONAKO (the Orenburg Oil Company, or Orenburgskaya Neftyanaya Kompaniya)  ORNB.RTS, the Eastern Oil Company (Vostochnaya Nefytanaya Kompniya) and Slavneft, found no government support.
Sources said Shafranik, in search of a consolation prize, was now trying to create a financial-industrial group uniting some of the firms he wanted to merge and second-tier players.
Had Shafranik succeeded with his merger plans, he would have created Russia's largest oil producer, a super company whose units collectively produced over 89 million tonnes in 1995 -- far above current leader LUKoil, which produced over 57 million tonnes last year.
"Shafranik had this idea and was excited about it for a while, but then it ran into big problems with government acceptance," said one source who asked not be named.
The company, had it been created, would have accounted for nearly one third of Russia's total 1995 oil output of around 305 million tonnes. Russia is the world's third largest oil producer.
The sources said the proposed financial industrial group would consist of the Tyumen Oil Company, SIBUR (the Siberian- Urals Oil and Gas Chemicals Company, or Sibirsko-Uralskaya Neftegazokhimicheskaya Kompaniya), the Eastern Oil Company, Slavneft (a joint venture between Russia's Megionneftegaz MFGS.RTS and Belarus) and the Eastern-Siberian Oil and Gas Company (Vostochno-Sibirskaya Neftegazovaya Kompaniya).
SIBUR and Eastern-Siberian are two independents that do not have crude oil production units.
Sergei Verin, secretary to the board of directors of the Tyumen Oil Company, where Shafranik is chairman of the board, said only that the proposed financial-industrial group would undertake "joint projects".
Shafranik had hinted at a news conference in July, when he was still energy minister, that four companies would merge, but refused to say which ones.
"This is a big secret, and I'm not going to name the oil companies," he said. "Somebody will be against it, very against it, because this will be a powerful competitor."
Fuel and Energy Ministry spokesmen declined to comment on the failed proposal, and earlier prohibited a correspondent from raising the issue with the new minister, Pyotr Rodionov, as one condition of receiving an interview.
"Why don't you ask Shafranik?" Rodionov said on Thursday after a cabinet meeting, when asked about the failed merger.
Verin said only that a merger was not now being discussed and that the Tyumen Oil Company was the motor behind the financial-industrial group talks.
"Our goal is to undertake joint projects that a single company itself could not take on alone," Verin said, adding that all sides were in active negotiations on a development strategy.
Shafranik left the Fuel and Energy Ministry in August for the Tyumen Oil Company. It is based in Siberia's oil-rich Tyumen region, where Shafranik was administration head before taking his ministry post in 1993.
Shafranik saw Russia's state-run, monolithic oil industry transformed into 13 privatised companies, most of them vertically integrated, while he was minister and watched many ministry specialists quit for lucrative jobs at the new firms.
The sources did not say who in the government had rejected Shafranik's proposal. The shake-up of the oil industry was masterminded by Prime Minister Viktor Chernomyrdin and President Boris Yeltsin.
