Russia, hoping to boost industrial output, announced plans on Monday for lower electricity and rail transport prices, cheering energy-hungry aluminium plants but worrying Western economists.
President Boris Yeltsin's press service said Yeltsin had signed a decree at the weekend cutting wholesale electricity charges for industrial and residential customers from November 1 by an average 10 percent from their August 1 levels.
The decree also promised to rein in runaway rail transport charges, saying tariffs for transport by rail on electric locomotives would be set by the new electricity pricing rules.
Yeltsin's decree also promised to create a wholesale natural gas market by next year.
By bringing order to unruly pricing structures, the decree also aims to improve tax collection.
Privatised aluminium smelters in Russia, one of the world's largest producers, said the new rules would help them save them money as electricity and transport are two of the major costs in producing and exporting the non-ferrous metal.
But Yeltsin's decree aroused doubt from Western economists, who called it little more than a short-term way of plugging the budget deficit and unsustainable in the long run.
"Of course this makes us happy," said a representative in Moscow of the big Krasnoyarsk aluminium smelter.
But he declined to say how it would affect output.
"It's not sustainable in the long term," said a top Western economist. "Over the short term, it will reduce production costs, but it does nothing to solve nonpayments."
Boris Arlyuk, managing director of St Petersburg-based Alumconsult, said that Russia's average industrial electricity prices were already much higher than world charges.
But Russian smelters rarely pay full price, thus helping to fuel a massive non-payments cycle in which aluminium plants -- a major consumer of electricity -- owe regional utilities for supplies, who in turn owe the state unpaid taxes.
Yeltsin's decree is partly designed to break this cycle.
The decree also said gas and electricity producers would be liable for excise and profits tax on proceeds from collecting debts for their supplies, as long as these proceeds did not fall below the actual cost of producing and transmitting supplies.
That means it could become easier for utilities to collect money from aluminium producers and other industrial customers.
Arlyuk said domestic electricity tariffs vary greatly, with the Kandalaksha aluminium smelter in the European part of Russia charged the rouble equivalent of $25 per megawatt hour, and using 17 megawatt hours to produce each tonne.
But rates at the giant Bratsk smelter in Siberia were the equivalent of $6 per megawatt hour -- the same, Arlyuk said, as in big aluminium producing countries like Canada and Norway.
Bratsk, using 17.7 megawatt hours per tonne of produced aluminium, spent only $106 per tonne on electricity compared to about $425 per tonne for Kandalaksha.
Dmitry Kryukov, a utilities analyst at Renaissance Capital, said that partly privatised national power company Unified Energy System (RAO Yedinaya Energeticheskaya Sistema) would see lower revenues.
But he said its cash flow could improve since it would be taxed only when paid for deliveries, and not before.
Still, Anatoly Gamanov, head of tariffs at the aluminium producers' group Kontsern Alyuminiy, said he doubted regional utilities would be happy to receive less for their supplies.
"This is not the first time we've seen something like this, and some regional utilities may put up a fight."
UES owns 29 power plants and holds 49 percent stakes in most of the privatised "energo" regional utilities.
Electricity and rail tariffs have risen faster than the overall producers price index, prompting Kremlin officials to seek ways to give industrial producers a break.
