Russia, dramatically changing its approach to foreign investment in its huge oil sector, said on Monday that new domestic companies, not Western majors, would be given the upper hand in future billion-dollar energy deals.
Vladimir Tumarkin, chief spokesman for Rosneft, the state oil holding company which is being privatised and the state's agent in production-sharing deals, said the days of foreign oil firms winning majority stakes to tap Russian reserves were over.
"We have a new approach," Tumarkin said. "We do not wish to repeat the so-called mistakes of earlier deals, when majority stakes went to foreign companies and Russia was left out."
He told Reuters he was referring to three, high-profile deals with Western and Japanese oil investors off Russia's Far Eastern island of Sakhalin -- deals in which Russian equity and ownership play a relatively minor role.
As a test of the new approach to Western oil investors, he said Amoco Corp, Exxon and Texaco of the United States, Total SA of France and Norsk Hydro ASA of Norway -- all bidders in a recent tender to develop reserves in Timan-Pechora -- would be asked to form a consortium and to give at least a 50 percent stake to Russian companies.
The companies had bid, some individually, some together, to develop up to 200 million tonnes of crude oil in the Khoreiverskaya Basin in oil-rich northern Timan-Pechora.
"The philosophy behind investing in Russian oil has changed," Tumarkin said, adding that Rosneft would hold talks with the companies next week.
Foreign oil investors are already wondering about the extent to which Moscow truly wants outside help in developing reserves in Russia, the world's third largest crude oil producer.
Lots of competitive investment dollars have gone to energy-rich Azerbaijan and Kazakhstan, where deals have got off the ground faster and more smoothly.
But while Russia has said it wants to turn around its flagging oil sector, where output has declined by 46 percent since the mid-1980s, its newly-privatised oil companies may not be able to carry the banner.
"The question is, do the Russian companies have the financing for all this," said oil analyst James Bunch at Renaissance Capital in Moscow.
Some of Russia's vertically-integrated oil companies have the makings of future stars, with savvy management and reserves that put them in the world's big league. But many of them are weighed down by non-payments and corporate taxes that leave them little free cash to invest.
"I don't think the size of stakes (in production-sharing contracts) makes that much difference to Western companies -- what is important is the economics of the deal," said oil and gas analyst Stuart Amor of CS First Boston in London.
He said it was doubtful whether Russian companies could find the money needed in the near-term to work with foreign investors and that crude oil output levels were, as a result, unlikely to rise significantly.
U.S. energy companies have invested less than $1 billion of the $60 billion they have said they plan to commit to Russian oil deals, complaining of political and legal risk.
Prominent projects -- including the $40 billion international Timan Pechora Company deal, and Amoco's $50 billion plan with Russian oil group YUKOS to tap Priobsk reserves -- are beset by quibbles with the Russians over equity stakes, contributions, and asset valuations.
"They're obviously not going to like it," said one Western analyst of Russia's new approach. "But I don't know if it will drive them out."
