Russia's new grain traders, looking for opportunities to make money and feed their vast country, said they were struggling to flourish in an arena now free of the state but lacking basic market structures too.
Preliminary data from the State Statistics Committee on Friday showed this year's gross grain harvest was 74.6 million tonnes, just eight percent up on 1995's disastrous 30-year low.
That could still leave supplies tight and, with no local equivalent of the Chicago Board of Trade or Canadian Wheat Board, traders will again be left to sift through bewildering market rumours and to pound the steppes in search of grain.
It is a Wild East bazaar, where producers prefer cash on delivery and where Soviet collective farming has left a deep suspicion of anything that looks like financial sophistication. But it is also, traders say, a place with golden opportunities.
"The arbitrage opportunities are excellent," said independent agriculture analyst Andrei Sizov of SovEcon Ltd consultancy, referring to trade in agricultural commodities from Russia and the former Soviet republics Ukraine and Kazakhstan.
He said Western commodities houses were actively arbitraging everything from sunflower oil in Russia's grain-belt North Caucasus to Ukrainian wheat and Uzbek cotton.
But other senior industry sources were at odds over how to trade in the post-Soviet market, where the state is no longer a major presence but where the new rules of the game are opaque.
Moscow shocked world markets in the 1970s by purchasing tens of millions of tonnes of foreign grain.
But the hard-up Russian government is keeping out of the market and last year relied on private traders to make up for Russia's worst grain harvest in three decades.
Arkady Zlochevsky, president of OGO, one of Russia's largest private commodities houses, said the domestic grain market was tough this year because few domestic traders had ready cash.
"The arbitrage situation is not as good this year because deliveries, especially from Ukraine, are unreliable, and because nobody has any money," he said.
Yet other sources said buyers were rushing to fill contracts left over from the last crop marketing year, when poor harvests across the ex-Soviet Union made supplies short.
"It used to be a seller's market only -- now buyers are on an equal footing," said a trader at a Western commodities house.
Russian farmers are already demanding prices above world levels and are selling standard, third-class bread-making wheat for 0.97 to 1.00 million roubles per tonne (about $177-$183 at current exchange rates). Delivery from central regions to Moscow or other big cities adds another 200,000 roubles per tonne.
Alexander Yukish, president of Russia's Grain Union industry group, said Ukrainian supplies were cheaper at 850,000 roubles a tonne, but said a 20 percent Russian value added tax and freight costs could quickly make up the difference.
Kazakh wheat before delivery to Russia across thousands of kilometres (miles) cost about one million roubles a tonne.
No one knows what percentage of Russian grain is traded domestically, in spite of the fact that the new private sector has in large part helped the government avoid major imports by selling domestic supplies to far-flung regions in Siberia.
The Russian Exchange, formerly known as the Russian Commodities and Raw Materials Exchange, has a puny turnover in grain contracts and registered no deals last month.
Farmers, burned by the late-paying state in the past, think only of roubles in hand, and not of hedging output with futures.
"For Western commodities houses, this is still a risky market," said Vasily Chinkaryov, deputy director at Eximkhleb, adding one could never be sure of receiving contracted supplies.
There are hundreds of so-called grain trading outfits across Russia, buying small lots here and there and wreaking havoc on the market by sometimes failing to pay producers.
Market sophistication is low, and even some top Russian traders do not see what "arbitrage" -- which in Russian denotes an arbitration court, not playing with price differences on commodities in different markets -- has to do with making money.
"What does our judicial process have to do with trading grain?" asked one senior Russian trader in all seriousness.
Still, Russian grain is finding channels through which to move, often abroad.
Russia registered a total of 1.2 million tonnes of wheat and wheat-rye exports since the beginning of the year, with September exports nearly doubling to 62,500 tonnes, according to State Customs Committee figures quoted by Interfax news agency.
--Moscow Newsroom, +7095 941 8520 ($1 = 5,453 roubles)
