Russia's grain crop is proving to be one of its lowest in three decades, prompting trade sources on Monday to speculate that the government could return to world markets for imports to feed the military and remote areas.
The nearly complete 1996 harvest, bucking a trend of increased grain output across the world, weighs in at a gross 74.6 million tonnes, with little high-quality bread wheat and virtually no stocks from last year's disastrous output, which was the worst for more than 30 years.
"The figure is, I think, slightly lower than we expected," said a Western agriculture source, commenting on preliminary data published by the State Statistics Committee on Friday.
"It means additional imports."
The cash-strapped Russian state insisted last year it had long ago left world markets for good.
But Anatoly Manellya, head of agriculture forecasting at the Centre for Economic Trends, a think-tank set up by the Russian government, said the Federal Food Corporation, the state agency responsible for reserves to feed the armed forces and remote towns, might soon be in the international market.
"The Federal Food Corporation is probably going to try to do some deals," he said, adding only that it was in preliminary negotiations.
The agency has bought a mere 450,000 tonnes of domestic grain out of the 4.5 million tonnes it plans to buy this year.
"As far as I know, the government is talking about possible imports for us, but I cannot tell you anything more since we merely fulfil government orders and they have not yet told us anything," said Corporation deputy director Yuri Lysenko.
Russia's harvest last year was officially 63.4 million tonnes and record-high world grain prices kept traders from importing any significant quantities from beyond the former Soviet Union and Eastern Europe.
This year prices are lower after bumper world harvests, with benchmark Chicago contracts at $3.75 per bushel after a long spell above $5 and a spike to $7.50 in March.
But Russian farmers, mindful of recent high prices, have declined to sell to state reserves -- making government officials jittery over how to feed the soldiers and isolated Arctic cities that cannot depend on the private sector.
"It seems like more and more contracts are being talked, especially in the (Russian) Far East," said the Western source, who forecast Russia's total grain imports over the 1996/97 crop marketing year from all sources at five million tonnes.
Andrei Sizov of the private agricultural consultancy SovEcon Ltd recently put the total at six to seven million tonnes.
Allowing for the eight or nine percent that is lost after cleaning, Russia's 1996 net harvest will probably weigh in at a lean 68 to 69 million tonnes -- not much above last year.
Manellya said he had told the cabinet last week that net output would be 69.8 million tonnes.
"This is better than last year, but is still one of the three worst harvests in the last three decades," he said.
-- Moscow Newsroom +7095 941 8520
