Russia's second-generation, billion-dollar foreign oil projects are finding out that close ties to top government figures, delicate talks with new partners and careful handling of oil-rich, ambitious regions are vital.
Western oil companies eyeing Arctic reserves need close Kremlin relationships and savvy negotiating skills more than ever, now that Moscow has a cooler, tougher attitude toward Western participation in oil production-sharing deals.
Support from President Boris Yeltsin, who oversaw the transformation of the oil sector into privatised companies and who underwent heart surgery on Tuesday, is crucial.
So is a willingness to get out the pencils and redo budgets after talks with increasingly demanding Russian partners.
The factors -- some old, some new --  will decide whether deals stay on the drawing board or get off the ground.
In one of Russia's most prominent projects, Amoco Corp of the United States and Russian oil giant YUKOS are in tortuous talks that, analysts said, revolve around how to accomodate YUKOS shareholder Bank Menatep.
"Any time you add a new player to the game, you need to re-establish what the ground rules are," said Dan Westbrook, senior vice-president and resident manager of Amoco Eurasia Petroleum Company, in a recent telephone interview.
Leading commercial bank Menatep owns a 33 percent stake in YUKOS, Russia's second largest oil producer, and controls a further 45 percent stake formally owned by the government.
The two companies plan to spend $50 billion or so to tap the huge Priobsk oil field, which could hold 610 million recoverable tonnes, in Siberia's Tyumen region.
Russia's first-generation foreign oil deals, all off the Russian Far Eastern island of Sakhalin, took forever to hammer out but largely gave Western partners the leading equity stakes they demanded as insurance for the political risk of investing.
Now, years later, Moscow officials say quietly that Russia should have at least equal status, if not the upper hand.
That makes Kremlin and Fuel and Energy Ministry patronage as important as ever to getting deals to the production stage.
Succesful implementation of projects is still heavily dependent on people at the top, like Yeltsin -- thus showing the enduring power of personalities to moving oil deals forward in Russia, in spite of Moscow's moves to make laws, not people, the framework for investments.
The Timan-Pechora Company, or TPC, which groups Texaco, Amoco, Exxon, Norsk Hydro AS Russia's Rosneft and an exploration outfit in a $40 billion project in the Timan-Pechora basin, saw negotiations temporarily halt over the unexpected death of a key Russian negotiating partner.
TPC President Tom Hazen said he was confident talks to tap up to 360 million tonnes of oil would continue with a special Russian delegation after the Fuel and Energy Ministry selects a replacement for deceased delegation leader Vadim Dvurechensky, who was also a deputy Fuel and Energy minister.
"We are hopeful to continue our negotiations with the special delegation," Hazen said.
"There are very few remaining outstanding issues. I certainly wouldn't draw any conclusions that there have been a lack of negotiations or a termination of discussions."
Both Westbrook and Hazen declined to say when their projects could be finalised.
Western oil companies have a new worry -- the growing demands by oil-rich regions for a bigger cut in deals.
Interfax news agency earlier this week quoted the chairman of the State Duma lower parliament house's Committee on Natural Resources as saying that the Nenets regional Duma had recommended the government break off talks with TPC over regional tax issues.
-- Moscow Newsroom, +7095 941 8520
