President Boris Yeltsin's surgery on Tuesday might be a heart stopper for some volatile commodities and currency markets, but recent history proves Russian oil and gas exports are unfazed by Kremlin dramas.
Traders have seen tanks fire at Russia's White House, cloak-and-dagger power struggles and war in oil-rich Chechnya -- and each time, they say, Russian supplies of oil and natural gas to Europe and the Mediterranean have held steady.
Russia is the world's third-largest crude oil producer and single biggest natural gas producer; its energy heats and powers much of Europe and is a multi-billion dollar cash cow for Russia no matter who sits in the Kremlin hot seat.
This time, with Yeltsin under the knife this morning for a gruelling, hours-long heart bypass, should be no different.
"Politics don't affect us," said trader Vladimir Solovyov of Nafta-Moskva, one of Russia's leading oil exporters.
"We are more interested in things like government decrees saying 'export tariff introduced' or 'export tariff scrapped'.
Yeltsin's surgery began against domestic and international worries that if the operation fails, Russia could plunge into political uncertainty that could hit oil and gas exports.
With about one third of Russia's 6.2 million barrels per day output exported outside the former Soviet Union, and with Russian natural gas keeping one third of Europe warm, it is easy to see why traders worry about supply.
But when Russian oil exports do fluctuate, it is on less dramatic events, like storms at the Black Sea export outlet of Novorossiisk, one-off government supply programmes to former Soviet allies and which oil company is flavour of the month with export officials.
Gas exports can fluctuate on occasional explosions in Russia's gas pipeline system, the largest in the world.
Analysts said that with domestic demand flat while the Russian economy recovers, exports will be stable near-term.
Industry sources said there is no danger of conservative officials playing with the taps while Yeltsin was incapacitated, but they said some risk-averse European buyers could insist on contract terms less beneficial to Russian exporters.
"Our partners could get worried and demand terms not as attractive to us," said a trade financer at International Economic Cooperation, or MES, another leading oil exporter.
Others said money, not politics, motivated exports -- and with domestic oil prices below world levels, it is not hard to make money exporting the stuff.
"We like good prices on world markets," Nafta-Moskva's Solovyov said.
Political tensions in other major oil exporting countries often cause benchmark London and New York oil prices to leap over worries about supply disruptions.
Nervous International Petroleum Exchange traders swung spot prices in London when Yeltsin sacked maverick security tsar General Alexander Lebed last month.
But Moscow oil traders and analysts said that everyone should just calm down.
"This stuff (oil) is scheduled for export months in advance and it's technically very difficult to fiddle with the taps," said energy analyst Peter Houlder of CentreInvest consultancy.
Even the conservatives who covet Yeltsin's Kremlin seat remember the good old Soviet oil-boom days, when exports -- not disruptions to them -- were the key to power and wealth and enticed the Soviet Union to crank up output and become the world's largest oil producer.
