Crude oil output in Russia, the world's third-largest oil producer, is finally ending a decade of dramatic decline, but it is still a long way from switching back into top gear.
"We could see 1997 output stabilise at 1996's level," said Vitaly Kamenev of the Economy Ministry's fuel department. "But we won't see any real pick-up until at least 1998."
Russian oil output slipped two percent year-on-year to 146 million tonnes in the first half of 1996, after falling three percent in the first half of 1994, according to the State Statistics Committee. Most of the decline came from companies producing over 10 million tonnes a year.
"It is the ministry's opinion that output will fall two or three percent next year," said a Fuel and Energy Ministry source who declined to be named, saying that the matter was sensitive.
That would still be one of the lowest declines Russia's beleaguered oil industry has seen in recent years.
It would also be a sign that the era of steep plunges is finally drawing to a close.
Russia's 1995 output of 305 million tonnes, or 6.2 million barrels per day, is stabilising at just over half of 1987's peak of 570 million tonnes (11.4 million bpd).
The numbers matter because they indicate the pace at which Russia, once the world's largest oil producer, may regain that place as its economy and domestic oil prices grow.
But it is still early.
"There are a lot of expectations that the barrier will be broken next year, but it won't -- output will be flat," said Tamara Okhundova, energy analyst at the Centre for Economic Trends, a research institute set up by the government.
Moscow is for now committed to subsidising domestic oil prices to help flagging industrial enterprises, and export levels cannot rise significantly until new pipelines are built -- two key factors that do not inspire higher production levels.
"Production next year is going to be pretty flat, and if anything, slightly lower," said energy analyst Jeremy Hudson of Salomon Brothers in London.
He said that if parliament soon approved a list of reserves open to production-sharing, an initial, positive impact on output could be felt by the end of 1997.
Russia's joint ventures, which account for less than five percent of production, are showing the biggest increases in output, with their production up 18 percent in the first half 1996 to seven million tonnes.
When the big-ticket joint ventures and production-sharing deals begin producing in several years, total output could soar.
A bull-run in world prices and Moscow's scrapped export duties have inspired Russian producers to put even more oil into already over-strapped export pipelines.
But a tax clampdown on high foreign-exchange earners and a lack of commitment by new shareholders in Russian oil companies to reinvest in production are both sucking up cash.
Julian Leigh, Russia analyst at the Centre for Global Energy Studies in London, said higher export dollars were not necessarily finding their way back into production.
He said domestic commercial banks, some of which are major stockholders in big Russian oil companies, preferred to pump cash into markets with better returns, like equity.
Rehabilitating wells is one of the fastest and cheapest ways to boost output, but most of the easy, less expensive workovers have been completed and average well production rates have not been as high as expected.
Russia has 144,000 oil wells, of which nearly 40,000, or 28 percent, are idle. Hudson said average workover rates -- the cost of bringing these back on stream -- could rise to $100,000 per well from $25,000.
