Russian diamond giant Almazy- Rossii Sakha (ARS) said on Wednesday officials were battling for control over Russia's lucrative gem sector but a forthcoming deal with De Beers was in sight.
ARS president Vyacheslav Shtyrov told a news conference that a long-delayed trade agreement with the South African gem giant could be signed by December.
But he said Russian Prime Minister Viktor Chernomyrdin, who could have a chance to sign the deal as soon as this week, would put it off until next month because of a government probe of ARS's finances -- a probe Shtyrov says may be part of manoevres among government officials for influence over the group.
The investigation and struggle for control over ARS come as the diamond company seeks more scope to export independently of De Beers. ARS supplies a quarter of De Beers output, nearly all Russia's diamonds and is Russia's sole authorised exporter.
Shtyrov said that under the trade agreement with De Beers, based on a memorandum initialled in February, ARS would have the right to export $180 million of gems a year independent of De Beers, or 5.8 percent of ARS's $1.38 billion in sales last year.
That could yield a rich trove of influence and power for whichever government ministries succeed in gaining the upper hand in controlling those sales.
ARS, which gave London investment bank NatWest Markets a mandate in July to raise $500 million in capital, wants to increase exploration and mining operations -- giving officials more incentive to grapple for control of the state-owned firm.
"We're very seriously worried about the recent accusations, which come at, and I say this in quotation marks, at an appropriate moment," said Mikhail Nikolayev, president of the vast Sakha-Yakutia region in Siberia where ARS is based.
He told the news conference he was referring to the impending De Beers deal and to ARS's plan to raise funds abroad.
The probe, which follows charges from tax officials and the prosecutor-general's office that surfaced last week, revolve around alleged unpaid taxes and breaches of hard currency regulations for which fines could total $379 million.
Nikolayev said ARS had no tax arrears to the federal budget, and that Finance Ministry investigations into ARS finances turned up so-called insufficiencies but no major problems.
"They (the charges) are extremely debatable," said Shtyrov, adding that government questions over how to value raw gems supplied to ARS when the company was set up in 1991 were questions for accountants, not for lawyers.
He said ARS would defend itself in Russia's courts if it had to and restore its reputation with partners.
"If the result of all of this is that we lose our investment projects, then we will consider that Russia has lost -- and we will just eat bread and butter," he said.
Shtyrov, who is also vice-president of Sakha-Yakutia, said industry officials were struggling for influence over ARS.
Shtyrov said Yevgeny Bychkov, former head of the recently disbanded State Committee for Precious Metals and Stones, or Komdragmet, was still an influential figure in the industry.
Komdragment was broken up by presidential decree in August and the Finance Ministry has assumed its functions.
Shtyrov said Russia's diamond sector would see stability, in spite of plans by some officials to give domestic cutters and polishers a greater cut of gem output.
"There are always rumours of a major shake-up and reorganisation of the Russian diamond industry, but they are not founded," he said.
