Russia's state oil pipeline firm Transneft on Tuesday cast a shadow of doubt over the go-ahead for a proposed new pipeline across Russia when it said it had demanded a stronger role in the strategic deal.
Transneft spokesman Ravil Polyanin said the monopoly, which owns and operates Russia's vast, existing oil pipeline network, was not content to play the role of daily operator and wanted an equity stake in the important project.
"We want to be a shareholder," he said. "But the oil firms have not valued our technical expertise highly enough."
Companies holding a 50 percent stake in the Caspian Pipeline Consortium (CPC) that will build the proposed link are Chevron, Russian LUKoil, Mobil Corp , Rosneft, Oman Oil Company, British Gas Plc, Agip SpA of Italy, Kazakh Munaigaz and Oryx Energy Company.
Kazakhstan, Oman and Russia hold the remaining 50 percent.
A CPC official, speaking after a meeting last week in Moscow to try to push a long-delayed restructuring agreement ahead, said the deal would be signed next month.
But the consortium has not made any formal announcements on what was achieved and shareholders declined to give details.
The CPC consortium, in one of the former Soviet Union's most ambitious and important energy projects, wants to build a $1.5 billion pipeline from Kazakhstan's vast Tengiz oilfield through war-torn Chechnya to Russia's Black Sea port of Novorossiisk.
But a cloak of secrecy around last week's meeting raised questions over whether the group had overcome hurdles that have dogged it in the past, including prickly issues of Transneft's participation and of corporate and international financing.
"The transition committee successfully completed negotiations on restructuring and the final agreement will be signed in Moscow on December 6," said the CPC official, who added that he was not allowed to provide any details.
But several shareholders said the deadline was optimistic and stumbling blocks remained. "The subject is extremely sensitive and I cannot say one single word about CPC," said a Western oil executive whose company is a CPC shareholder.
A second similar Western source said: "I'm reluctant to say the deal is going to be signed on x or y date."
Polyanin said it was premature to say all outstanding problems had been resolved, adding that Transneft would seek to persuade consortium members to reallocate equity stakes.
He said Transneft was lobbying Deputy Fuel and Energy Minister Anatoly Shatalov to push CPC to give Transneft a share.
Transneft has a big strategic card to play, since it will operate the pipeline and help set and collect transit fees that will fill its coffers. If the fees are too high, it will throw a wrench into the economics of the deal for the Western partners.
CPC's main customers are Chevron and Mobil. Desperate to ship more oil out of their Tengiz project, they are already sending crude to Western markets via unconventional routes through Azerbaijan, Georgia and Finland on trains and barges.
CPC sources said Transneft's role and Russian taxes were the main issues preventing a final agreement for the pipeline which should eventually carry up to 70 million tonnes of oil a year (1.4 million barrels per day).
They also said it was a barometer of the extent to which Caspian onshore and offshore oil and pipeline projects will be able to get off the ground, and of Russia's willingness to see oil-rich former Soviet republics develop their own energy deals.
