Russia is trying to make things tougher for exporters of non-ferrous scrap metals, but impending tighter regulations will not keep Russian supplies from finding Western markets, industry sources said on Wednesday.
"There was a big once-and-for-all surge in scrap exports in the early stages of the break-up of the Soviet Union, but that's now over," said copper specialist Kevin Norrish of CRU International in London.
"The domestic market is tighter than it used to be, so there is a lot less going to Western Europe."
But he could not see proposed licensing of exporters hitting sales abroad, and other sources said Russia would still find European markets more attractive than the domestic one.
Moscow wants to license the export of scrap ferrous and non-ferrous metals to help provide steady supplies to domestic metals enterprises for processing and then export.
Russian news agencies said on Wednesday a decree on licensing could be signed by the end of this month.
The Industry Ministry in September sought to limit scrap exports to two million tonnes a year, but compromised by agreeing to a plan to license exporters.
"Maybe this scrap will be processed in Russia and then exported -- but the fact is that this material costs more abroad than it does in Russia," said a senior source at Tsvetmetexport, the former state metals export agency, who declined to be named.
Other industry sources said domestic metals firms were short of funds and that barter operations -- the means by which they would buy scrap -- were increasingly unattractive.
Nearly one third of Russian copper is produced from scrap, and officials are seeking ways to ensure steady supplies.
"There's no market for people to supply scrap to domestic enterprises and for them to then export it and get paid," said Sergei Bagrov, a non-ferrous export specialist at Promstalsyryo.
"Licensing will increase export of metal through all channels."
He said enterprises had already found ways to find the raw materials they needed.
Russian scrap copper exports were 54,000 tonnes in the first half of 1996, and Interfax news agency, which reported the data in September, said this was up 70 percent on total 1995 exports.
Western traders have said scrap availability on Western markets is often spotty and even unofficial estimates on scrap non-ferrous exports are hard to come by.
But two trends appear certain.
The exodus of large amounts of scrap copper, aluminium, nickel, steel, lead and iron that took place after the 1991 collapse of the Soviet Union is over, and Russia's scrap metal trade is consolidating as bigger, richer domestic and foreign players move in.
In the immediate post-Soviet years much of the scrap was smuggled from military bases and trade was so brisk that Russian industry sources described the Baltics as the world's largest non-ferrous metals exporters -- even though the three countries produce virtually no metals.
The Russian press is no longer full of tales of smugglers riding the train to the Baltics with copper cable in backpacks.
But the market is still one of the wildest and least transparent in Russia and dealers said licensing may not help.
"Russia is no longer just bleeding metal," Bagrov said. "(But) I would not say the market has become civilised."
Official export statistics, most of which do not include the scrap trade, were unreliable, he added.
