The world's biggest aluminium smelter, Russia's Bratsk plant, opposes any output-cutting schemes and wants to boost production and to compete better on world markets, a senior company official said on Thursday.
"Bratsk is an inveterate supporter of market-economy principles and not of schemes that violate such principles or of anti-monopoly laws," said Yuri Shlaifshtein, a Bratsk board member based in London who conducts corporate strategy and watches London Metal Exchange prices.
"Each company should choose the strategy best suiting it."
AOOT Bratsky Aluminievy Zavod (BrAZ), based in southern Siberia close to plentiful hydroelectric power, has already increased output of A7 higher-grade material to 69 percent of total production from 30 percent.
Shlaifshtein declined to provide production figures but said competitiveness abroad and at home were essential to Bratsk's long-term strategy.
An independent metals source who asked not to be named said Bratsk produced 62,800 tonnes of primary aluminium in October after 61,500 tonnes in September and 64,500 tonnes in August.
Bratsk's costs, already some of the lowest among Russian aluminium producers, are an average $1,250 per tonne of aluminium produced and transported to Rotterdam via St Petersburg, said Boris Arlyuk of the Alumconsult consultancy.
"Their production is pretty profitable," he said.
But Shlaifshtein said Bratsk was seeking to streamline costs even further and that a new, tough attitude to debtors by Russian tax officials could put flagging competitors in the European part of Russia out of business.
"Each factory should improve its economic situation and cost factors in order to be competitive on the market," he said.
Bratsk does not like to talk about a recently-ended global output-cutting deal which required Russian producers to cut back production to boost sagging world prices.
World prices are again flagging --- but Shlaifshtein said that this time, cutting output was not an option.
"The volume of output at the plant should change only on the basis of one's own strategic interests, of the overall economic situation and of the market situtaion," Shlaifshtein said.
He said it made economic sense for the plant to use its capacity, but gave no further details.
Bratsk, Russia's flagship aluminium smelter, wants to top its Soviet-era record output of 857,000 tonnes a year after 772,500 tonnes in 1995.
Its total capacity is at least 820,000 tonnes and possibly one million tonnes, according to Western industry sources.
Bratsk had already closed a unit for technological and environmental reasons by the time Russia, Canada, Australia, Norway, the United States and the European Union signed a two-year global output-cutting memorandum of understanding in March 1994. The deal expired this spring.
Bratsk produces most of its metal under tolling arrangements with London-based shareholder Trans-World Group, which has at least a 50 percent stake in the plant. --Moscow Newsroom, +7095 941 8520
