Russia's demand for feed grains will outstrip any output increases its agriculture sector manages in coming years, which could turn the country into a big importer, industry officials said on Friday.
Russia, which has just completed its second poor harvest in two years, the third worst in 30 years, is heading into the next crop cycle with few signs that its dismal track-record will soon recover.
"For now, consumption is still low enough to offset the decline in output, but demand is still going to rise faster than production," said Alexander Yukish, president of the Grain Union, which groups leading private traders.
Russian farmers have to struggle to get their hands on whatever seeds, tractors and fertilisers they can scrape together.
The agriculture sector, one of the most inefficient and least-reformed in Russia, has not adopted the pro-market changes reshaping some other domestic industries.
"Russia will need at least 120 million tonnes of grain when livestock levels and consumption return to the levels we had in 1990," said Yukish. But he said Russian grains output, which has nearly halved in recent years, would not stage a comeback for at least another five or 10 years.
"There is just not enough feed grain in Russia -- we've got to produce more soymeal and maize," Alexander Vasyutin, deputy head of the Agriculture Ministry's crops growing section, said.
Russia has been slaughtering livestock because it does not have enough grain to feed it. Bread is a staple in Russia but people are eating less and product quality is patchy.
Russia's just-completed 1996 gross harvest was 74.6 million tonnes, according to preliminary official figures -- just eight percent above 1995's disastrous net 63.4 million tonnes, the worst since about 1965.
About eight percent of the 1996 total will be lost after cleaning -- putting net output at about 68.6 million tonnes.
Some analysts say up to 20 percent of Russia's harvest was lost in the Soviet era due to inefficient, obsolete combines, and that losses now, with even less money for adequate equipment, may still be severe.
"Next year, we'll see the same harvest we had this year, maybe a little more, maybe a little less," Yukish said. "But to expect sharp increases in output next year is not realistic."
Industry officials said that with the domestic economy showing signs of turning around and a growing middle-class hungry for meat, Russia must act fast if it is to satisfy demand in the future.
Already the signs do not point to big increases next year.
Vasyutin said farmers, afraid of unseasonably warm, dry weather that has lasted into November across Russia's grain belt, had sown 1.2 million fewer hectares, or around 14.5 million hectares, to winter grains for harvesting in 1997.
"Crops are in a satisfactory condition, but moisture levels are not adequate," he said, adding government officials had targeted a 1997 harvest of at least 70 million tonnes."
Winter wheat accounts for about 15 percent of Russian wheat output and can crucially tip the balance.
"Russians want to eat meat -- but this desire has to be preceeded by very serious structural changes in agriculture," Yukish said. "Russia will be a big feed grains importer for quite a while -- of that I am quite sure."
-- Moscow Newsroom, +7095 941 8520
