Azerbaijan is proving more successful in attracting foreign oil investment dollars than big brother Russia, but the Caspian state must still deal with Moscow if it wants to become a major world energy player.
In the latest deal underscoring the shift, Azeri oil officials said Amoco Corp, Unocal Corp, Japan's Itochu Corp and Saudi Arabia's Delta Nimir would initial a $1.5 billion agreement with Azeri officials on December 14 to tap unexplored reserves in the Azeri sector of the Caspian.
The deal is the fourth multi-billion-dollar project Baku has won since the breakup of the Soviet Union in 1991 and takes place as a chill settles over Western oil companies struggling to push Russian-based deals through a legal maze.
"I think there's really a question of how much Russia really wants the investment," said one Western oil executive in Moscow. "With the Azeris, it's never really a question."
Douglas Hill, resident manager of Amoco unit Amoco Caspian Sea Petroleum Ltd in Baku, said the Azeri government had done much to make deals attractive to foreign investors.
"There's a strong realisation here that some assistance is needed and that oil is going to be the primary driver of the economy," he said.
Actual foreign oil investment in Russia has all but dried up as Moscow struggles to pass tax and resource laws backing investors' projects and is less than $1 billion out of a planned $60 billion. No deals are close to the production stage.
In contrast, Azerbaijan's flagship $8 billion Azerbaijan International Operating Company (AIOC) project grouping 13 international oil companies is scheduled to start pumping in the third quarter of next year.
Moscow is not indifferent to the change in focus to high-yielding Caspian reserves and has pushed to get Russian oil giant LUKoil involved in the projects -- partly, some analysts say, in exchange for not arguing over who owns Caspian oil.
Azerbaijan, Iran, Kazakhstan, Turkmenistan and Russia all border the sea. Russia says its resources should be shared equally but Azerbaijan follows a sectoral approach and is proceeding with deals in its area.
"Of course, Azerbaijan is now our competitor," said Nikolai Bolmasov, deputy head of the Russian Fuel and Energy Ministry's section for cooperation with the Commonwealth of Independent States.
He said Moscow was "analysing" Azerbaijan's role in landing foreign oil deals but declined to say if the ministry would produce policy directives on the issue.
Caspian oil projects are next door to the Middle East Gulf region, which contains nearly 70 percent of world oil reserves and produces one quarter of global oil supplies. They will make Azerbaijan and neighbouring Kazakhstan big competitors to Russia.
"Over the next three or four years, production will shift from Siberia to higher yielding Caspian and Sakhalin projects," Stephen O'Sullivan, associate director of oil and gas at MC Securities in London, said in a recent interview.
But the deals on Far Eastern Sakhalin island do not have Russian majors as shareholders, and analysts say LUKoil's participation in leading Azeri deals has kept Moscow quiet on the Caspian status issue.
LUKoil could yet join the latest Caspian group, which will tap the unexplored Dan-Ulduzu and Azhrafe reserves.
One hand Moscow has not forced is the question of how the region's oil will be transported to Western markets.
Russia is keen to earn crude oil transit tariffs and control supplies, but knows some new pipelines will probably go through Turkey due to worries over increased tanker traffic through the Bosphorus.
--Moscow Newsroom, +7095 941 8520
