Russia's state oil holding firm Rosneft said on Friday it would protest against a local decision to award Exxon Corp the right to tap Arctic oilfields, signalling Moscow's tougher line towards Western energy companies.
Rosneft spokesman Vladimir Tumarkin said Exxon, which regional officials declared the winner of a tender to develop the Central Khoreiverskaya oilfields in the northern Timan-Pechora area, would be given too many privileges.
"Exxon's bid violates the terms of the tender in that it would give Exxon the exclusive right to these resources as well as the right to tell the Russian side under what terms it should work," he told Reuters.
The protest is the most concrete evidence to date that Moscow, in a significant change of policy, is serious about giving its own oil companies a greater role in developing Russian oilfields.
The legal basis upon which Rosneft -- which bid jointly with a subsidiary and Amoco Corp in the tender -- would protest was not immediately clear.
Exxon officials could not be reached for comment.
"What are you talking about; how can they protest this?" said Anatoly Kazakov, deputy head of the Arkhangelsk oblast regional administration and a member of the region's Nenets autonomous district tender committee that on Thursday declared Exxon the winner.
"Everything was done absolutely normally."
Under the tender, Exxon would have a 50 percent stake and conduct negotiations to bring Rosneft, Russian oil firm KomiTEK and exploration body Arkhangelskgeoldobycha in to split the remaining 50 percent in a production-sharing contract.
Rosneft is the state's agent in all production-sharing contracts and has the right to dispose of the state's share of output from such deals.
Tumarkin said that under the original terms of the Central-Khoreiverskaya tender, no foreign firm had the right to tell the Russian side how to work.
"Exxon did not conduct negotiations with us when it bid and its proposal gives it an exclusive right to the reserves," he said.
The quarrel over who will develop the fields, which contain about 160 million tonnes of oil and require about $1.5 billion to develop, underscores the ambivalence Russia feels about attracting foreign oil investment.
One the one hand, it desperately needs the money. On the other hand, it is loath to repeat the kind of contracts signed to develop reserves off the Far Eastern island of Sakhalin, contracts in which foreign firms hold nearly 100 percent stakes.
"Fifty-fifty -- what's the problem?" said Kazakov."As a Russian, I agree we should support our companies. But if our companies don't have the money or financing, we have to do something else."
The squabble is the first test of how much more difficult Russia could make it for Western oil companies seeking to tap big reserves.
Tumarkin said Rosneft had wanted Exxon to form a consortium with at least some of the other bidders, including the informal Rosneft/Amoco alliance, Texaco Inc, Total SA of France and Norsk Hydro ASA.
But the idea had received little support, he said.
--Moscow Newsroom, +7095 941 8520
