Russia, whose sudden introduction of export curbs each winter can wreak havoc in the world's heavy fuel oil market, is unsure about what to do this season, traders said on Tuesday.
Most traders expected an export duty of up to 80,000 roubles per tonne of mazut, as heavy fuel oil is known in Russian. But Moscow is keeping the industry guessing longer than usual on the timing and size of a possible tariff.
"My crystal ball is broken, so you'll have to ask somebody else," said a senior source at a major Western trading house.
Yevgeny Lukashov, adviser to the Federal Energy Commission and close to the government's debate on how to regulate mazut exports, said the cabinet might debate the issue on Tuesday.
But he had no idea what the outcome would be.
Moscow has in recent years raised mazut export tariffs or banned deliveries abroad outright, which has conditioned traders to expect a restriction each winter.
But some industry sources questioned why Russia -- which usually slaps the curbs on in November to ensure cheap heating fuel supplies for factories and power plants -- is already in December with no decision yet on the matter.
Sarah Anderson of Energy Security Analysis Inc in Washington said Russia, which must ship some mazut to domestic users along its waterways before they freeze, was defeating the purpose of bolstering supplies by waiting so long.
"If you don't have a curb in place by October, the purpose is defeated. They really have to start dealing with this in October, because January is too late."
Other sources said the uncertainty over tariffs reflected not careful planning by Moscow but haphazard and inefficient decision-making based on Soviet-era thinking.
"It's item number 999 on a list of a thousand things to do," said Matthew Sagers of PlanEcon in Washington. But he said any curbs would not hit export levels because Russia was oversupplied with mazut in winter.
Others say demand at home is exceptionally difficult to fathom, since there is no domestic market and enterprises using the material are usually verging on bankruptcy.
"They'll in theory use as much as they can and pay as little as they can," one trader said, referring to traditional wasteful use of resources at factories and heating plants.
The lack of transparency makes it nearly impossible for traders to estimate how much extra mazut Russia needs during the winter and, correspondingly, what kind of tariff Moscow might slap on to achieve the supply balance it needs at home.
"It ends up going straight to users, so who knows how big the market is," a Russian trader said.
Some industry sources said an apparent shift in policy on the part of Russia's domestic oil companies was adding to the murkiness of the situation this year.
A second, senior Russian trader said the old logic of producers seeking to export to free up storage tank space and get cash, even at a net loss, was disappearing.
"The logic now is that it really might be better not to produce at all," he said, citing low refinery runs as producers seek to export crude oil instead.
The trader was one of a handful who thought there would be no curbs. "My gut feeling is there won't be a tariff. It's senseless. It could absolutely stop the trade," he said.
Others said a tariff would only dent export volumes.
"Refineries are very short of crude oil these days," said a Russian source at a Swiss trader. "But they'll still try to push something out (on world markets)."
