Russia is trying to shift financing of its tarnished gold sector to commercial banks while keeping control of exports, putting it on a collision course with the banks who say sales abroad are what interest them.
Moscow bullion officials view recent Central Bank decisions outlining new procedures for working with gold as a cautious, experimental step toward opening one of the country's most closed industries, the banks say.
"Administrative measures in Russia always mean something," said Dmitry Smirnov, head of precious metals operations at Vneshtorgbank, commenting on whether recent changes detailing accounting procedures for working with gold were Soviet-style bureaucratic paper-shuffling or more significant.
But he said: "Honestly, I wouldn't expect a sharp rise in output any time soon."
Russian bullion officials say they want to open up the domestic market, since the federal budget can no longer finance gold output or keep the state's strategic reserves well-stocked.
Canadian industry sources say Russia has the world's third-largest untapped gold reserves but is only the world's fifth-largest producer, a fact that reflects the difficulty it is having in channeling funds to mines.
Output in 1995 fell to about 130 tonnes and will slip in 1996 and 1997. About 130 banks have the right to trade in gold domestically but only five to eight can export gold abroad.
Banks financed only five tonnes of output last year.
Western bullion bankers say bank-financed output makes Russia a potential loose cannon on world markets, since it could quickly send output soaring.
Gold, which struck three-year lows earlier this week but has picked up slightly since, hovered around $368 an ounce on Thursday on the London Metal Exchange.
Domestic banks, some of which bought government gold-backed certificates in 1991 which they cashed in for metal, may already have significant stockpiles of gold which they are unable to export due to strict quota and licensing rules.
Boris Yeltsin's press service said on Thursday the president had decreed that Russia would not issue certificates backed by about 30 tonnes of gold as planned last year.
"I know that there are a lot of banks with a lot of gold that they are just waiting to sell abroad," said Dmitry Parmeshin, head of Inkombank's precious metals sales section.
"We all want to take this stuff out if the (domestic) market becomes liberalised enough."
Bankers declined to put a figure on the number of tonnes of gold held in Russian commercial banks, but one said the figure could be at least in the dozens.
The Central Bank in October introduced new accounting procedures for banks seeking to work on the domestic gold market. But the institution still largely controls exports through quotas and licences.
Interfax news agency quoted Central Bank precious metals director Sergei Kyshtymov as saying the rules would soon be simplified further.
"This can be viewed as the first step toward a more open gold market in Russia," said Sergei Brazhenko, deputy head of precious metals department at Rossiisky Kredit, one of the few banks with a licence to export gold abroad.
"The task is to hook up our output with world market demand, given that our domestic consumption is low."
Bullion bankers said domestic consumers bought 15 tonnes of gold last year, mostly as jewellery -- but they said trade restrictions hid the fact that consumer demand was higher.
"Once things become truly liberalised, the domestic market could really explode," Parmeshin said.
