A multinational group trying to build a $1.5 billion oil pipeline linking Kazakhstan and Russia held frantic, last-minute talks on Friday to try to resolve how much involvent Russia's pipeline firm will have in the deal.
The Caspian Pipeline Consortium, or CPC, which groups eight international oil companies and the states of Russia, Kazakhstan and Oman, hoped to sign off on a new restructuring deal on Friday afternoon after talks.
But Western oil executives and Russian energy officials, speaking hours before they hoped to sign, said it was far from clear what would happen because of a last-minute push by Russia's Transneft oil pipeline monopoly to take potentially the largest equity stake in the scheme.
"Are we going to sign? Well, I hope so, but I cannot say for sure," said a Western executive representing a CPC shareholder. "We're burning the midnight oil to work out the issues."
State-run Transneft's bid to be not just the operator but also a shareholder and strategic decision-maker in the group has made the Western shareholders very uneasy.
"Transneft could end up being the equity holder representing the Russian government," said one senior CPC source.
A breakthrough deal in April 1996 brought on board new equity holders but has yet to produce a share transfer. The companies involved are Chevron, which will own 15 percent of CPC, Russia's LUKoil with 12.5 percent, Mobil and Russia's Rosneft, 7.5 percent each, British Gas Plc and Italy's Agip SpA, two percent each, and Oryx Energy Company and Kazakhstan's Munaigaz 1.75 percent each.
The remaining 50 percent stake would be divided between Russia, 24 percent, Kazakhstan, 19 percent, and Oman, through the Oman Oil Company with seven percent. Transneft, with backing from Moscow, wants the other participants to agree to it taking the Russian government's 24 percent stake.
The proposed 1,580 km (990 mile) pipeline to link Kazakhstan's Tengiz oil field and Russia's Black Sea oil export outlet Novorossiisk would give Chevron and Mobil, partners in Tengiz, a much-needed dedicated export route for output that will peak at around 700,000 barrels per day (bpd) by 2010.
But if Transneft takes all or part of Russia's nearly one-quarter stake, it could use its leverage to raise transit tariffs or insist that some Russian oil flow through the link, which would cut into the economics of Chevron's and Mobil's $20 billion TengizChevroil (TCO) project and other Kazakh oil deals.
"The concern is Transneft's role in the management of the project. Conflict of interest is something very unpalatable to the Western side," a CPC source said.
Transneft spokesman Ravil Polyanin said the monopoly wanted the whole 24 percent stake and to be the operator of the pipeline, but that it might settle for a smaller equity share.
"Various states have used Russia's pipeline system in the past without contributions to Transneft," he said.
CPC executives are anxious to sign a deal, since the project is already years behind schedule and has stymied development of Caspian oil fields that require export routes before they can be economically tapped.
"There is an awful lot of pressure to sign," said one source.
But four senior Western CPC shareholders, including Mobil Oil Kazakstan Inc president Carl Burnett, told Reuters last month that if a deal was signed on Friday, it would probably not be for the crucial share transfer, the key step to getting the project off the ground.
The Caspian pipeline, to be built in phases across southern Russia but bypassing war-torn Chechnya, could eventually carry 1.4 million barrels per day, but other Kazakh projects will take up the extra capacity and leave little room for Russian oil.
