Russian and foreign oil companies signed a $2 billion deal on Friday to build a pipeline bringing oil from energy-rich Kazakhstan to Western markets, but frantic last-minute negotiations left questions unresolved.
In a delayed signing ceremony that saw Russia's leading oil officials huddling for secret consultations, the Caspian Pipeline Consortium inked documents splitting itself into two for tax reasons.
Russia said its oil pipeline monopoly Transneft might still take a stake. The role of Transneft has been a contentious issue among CPC members and a key negotiating point.
But the signing raised questions over how much closer CPC is to resolving differences and getting its pipeline project off the ground.
"We are extremely satisfied with the commercial structure that has been accomplished and we believe it offers a realistic approach to such an important project," said Chevron senior Vice-President Jeet Bindra.
"We are anxious now to move it to the next stage and hope that a share acquisition will be accomplished by February 1997 and that construction will begin next year."
A raft of officials, including LUKoil President Vagit Alekperov, Kazakh Oil and Gas Minister Nurlan Balgimbayev, former Fuel and Energy Minister Yuri Shafranik, Deputy Fuel and Energy Minister Anatoly Shatalov, attended the signing.
Chevron spokesman Edward Chow said the two entities -- CPC Russia and CPC Kazakhstan -- would have an identical management structure.
But Russian Deputy Prime Minister Valery Serov said it had not yet been decided whether Transneft would acquire the Russian government's 24 percent stake in the consortium.
Chevron will own 15 percent in the CPC, Russia's LUKoil 12.5 percent, Mobil and Russia's Rosneft 7.5 percent each, British Gas Plc and Italy's Agip SpA two percent each, and Oryx Energy Company and Kazakhstan's Munaigaz 1.75 percent each.
The remaining 50 percent is divided between Russia (24 percent), Kazakhstan (19 percent) and Oman (seven percent).
Transneft Chief Executive Officer Valery Chernayev told Reuters that the firm wanted Russia's entire 24 percent stake -- a demand that could delay the project even further.
CPC, set up in 1992, is seeking to build a 1,580 km (990 mile) pipeline linking Kazakhstan's Tengiz oil field and Russia's Black Sea oil expot outlet Novorossiisk.
Chevron and Mobil, with a $20 billion oil project in Tengiz, are the main future customers of the CPC pipeline.
Officials signed the deal in a Moscow hotel conference area, but only after breaking out of negotiations repeatedly to run to corners of the room and consult.
"This concludes the first phase of the project," Serov said. "Now a follow-up step, which will be no easier than what we accomplished today, must be made -- project implementation."
CPC nominated Transneft as operator, but CPC sources said they had a stringent list of conditions Transneft had to agree to and fulfill if it wanted the role.
Serov said Western firms bidding to construct the link would have to do so jointly with Russian or Kazakh partners and said the latter would be given preference as equipment suppliers.
"From our point of view, Transneft has been designated as an operator," Chevron's Bindra told Reuters, adding that the group must still negotiate an operating agreement.
"For three years, we failed to find a common language," Balgimbayev said, adding that he was pleased with the deal.
The pipeline will initially move 28 million tonnes a year (560,000 barrels per day) of Kazakh and possibly Russian crude and will have a peak capacity of 67 million tonnes a year (1.34 million bpd).
