A big diamond deal between Russia and De Beers has been caught up in political manoeuverings in Moscow. Bickering ministries and a shake-up in the leadership of the Russian diamond industry are conspiring to delay a crucial agreement.
Senior officials on both sides declined on Tuesday to predict when the government would sign the long-delayed deal, whose absence has kept world gem markets on edge.
Russian officials said Moscow and De Beers could head into 1997 with no formal contract signed.
Vladimir Piskunov, head of the Industry Ministry's new precious metals and stones section, said the government had been poring over a draft deal for at least a month since it said it was about ready to sign it and said unspecified pricing issues needed more scrutiny.
"Yes, I will admit that this (a final signing) could drag out into 1997," Piskunov said after a news conference.
De Beers representatives in Moscow declined to comment, with one saying, "As we've told you, when we have something to tell you, we'll tell you."
A spokesman for Almazy Rossii-Sakha, or ARS, De Beers' partner in the deal and Russia's diamond producer and sole legal exporter, said big shake-ups over 1996 in Russia's diamond industry were behind the delay.
"Do you want to know my opinion -- it's that there are some battles going on," said ARS spokesman Valentin Logunov.
De Beers controls about three quarters of the world diamond market and Russia accounts for about 25 percent of all the gems De Beers sells, so delays to the deal have worried gem watchers.
ARS produces nearly all of Russia's diamonds and had sales of $1.38 billion last year.
Piskunov said Moscow was committed to working with De Beers and that leaving the cartel was out of the question -- but he admitted negotiations had dragged on for over a year because of power struggles in Moscow.
"Some have said that we don't need this agreement, but time is playing against us," he said. "There are strict rules on this market and you have to play by them."
Asked if Russia could leave the cartel, he said, "No, no."
Piskunov said the Finance Ministry was struggling with the Industry Ministry for influence over diamond production, while federal budget drafters were arguing with the diamond-rich regions over their cut from taxes paid on exported gems.
De Beers has seen Russia's diamond sector go through turmoil this year, when President Boris Yeltsin disbanded one of its former negotiating partners, the State Committee for Precious Metals and Stones, and sacked its head, Yevgeny Bychkov.
Now Piskunov's department is wrangling with Goskhran, the Finance Ministry arm that will store and export precious metals and stones. Adding to the muddle is a formal investigation by Russia's tax police into ARS finances.
But Piskunov said the probe and Bychkov were not the fundamental reasons for the delay -- raising questions over just what Moscow objects to in the February memorandum.
"There are other processes involved," Piskunov said. "It's a battle of opposing sides. Russia's diamond industry has always been in the hands of several people."
He cast a cloud over an agreement De Beers said on Monday it had signed with Russia's Northern Mining-Geological Company Terra to set up a diamond exploration joint venture.
"We principally insist on the position that foreigners should not mine diamonds in Russia," he said, adding that Russian law prohibited the publication or sale of geological information on diamond deposits in the northern Arkhangelsk region.
