Russia's Western oil joint ventures are finding it increasingly difficult to export their output in the amounts needed to stay profitable as Moscow seeks to give domestic producers more pipeline space.
Joint ventures (JVs) produce only a trickle of Russia's crude oil -- but they need to export most, if not all, of their output to make money on their investments.
But Russian energy officials, who once courted Western oil majors and independents with promises of tax breaks and priority access to crowded pipelines, are rethinking the terms on which they want foreign oil firms to work in Russia.
"The pipelines are fairly close to capacity, so any increase (in exports) will be at somebody's expense, and that will be the JVs," said Julian Leigh of the Centre for Global Energy Studies in London in a recent interview.
Russia's tightening of access to its export pipelines is a barometer of how willing Moscow will be in coming years to let big-ticket foreign investors with planned, multi-billion dollar production-sharing contracts export the volumes they need.
Most of those projects will require new pipelines -- but in the initial stages, they will probably use existing pipelines.
"It's becoming more and more difficult," said Igor Ishkayev, Moscow-based representative for the Tatex joint venture, whose foreign partner is Global Natural Resources of the United States' unit Texneft Inc.
"The big companies, like LUKoil, can send out as much as they want. Nobody cares about a little joint venture."
About six joint ventures out of the 40 or so producing in Russia and exporting have the right to export 100 percent of their output until September 1997. Others enjoy tax breaks.
Most ventures in theory have priority access.
But in practice, they are often elbowed aside from month to month depending on world oil prices, the amount domestic producers want to export and government export programmes.
When asked about priority access for the ventures, a Transneft official dealing with exports, who declined to be identified, said:
"We don't distinguish between oil produced by our companies and oil produced by joint ventures."
Transneft, the state oil pipeline monopoly, works with so-called designated coordinators -- Russia's large producers, who are often interested in increasing their own exports -- to allocate pipeline space.
"Access to Transneft pipelines is based on personal relationships with the Transneft people," said analyst Zarko Stefanovski of T Hoare &amp; Co in London in a recent interview.
"Russian producers are going to increase the pressure to be given more pipeline capacity -- this will certainly be a problem in the future."
Joint ventures accounted for 4.8 percent of total Russian output last year, or around 250,000 barrels per day (bpd), according to State Statistics Committee figures, up from four percent in 1994. But they account for about 10 percent of Russia's 2.0 million bpd exports.
"Priority access will hardly be continued next year, which will affect the operations of this joint venture very negatively," said Alexander Khrustalov, marketing specialist at KomiArcticOil, whose Western partner is British Gas Plc and which exports about 90 percent of its 25,000 bpd output.
Customs officials, who now make policy as well as implementing it, said in September that some prominent ventures could be liable for millions of dollars in taxes and fines for so-called "excess" exports outside their exemptions.
"The issue is not necessarily the length of the tax exemption, it's the intent behind it," said one top Western oil executive who asked not to be named.
