Russia's diamond industry, bogged down by structural chaos and unauthorised exports, cast a shadow over world gem markets on Wednesday by saying that prospects for a trade deal with De Beers by 1997 looked grim.
But a senior spokesman for Russia's diamond company Almazy Rossii-Sakha, or ARS, which is De Beers' negotiating partner and Russia's near-monopoly producer, said Moscow would eventually negotiate a deal and quitting the cartel was not an option.
De Beers, frustrated over Moscow's lack of response on a new trade deal and irritated by gem exports outside an interim scheme, gave Russia until the end of 1996 to sign a trade deal and said it would otherwise terminate the interim arrangement.
ARS spokesman Valentin Logunov, asked if the government would meet the deadline, said, "You should ask the government, especially the finance minister. This is his question --- and it's hard to say whether he'll find time."
Russia is a key player in the world diamond trade, supplying De Beers with about 20 percent of its total rough gem sales. De Beers accounts for 75 percent of global rough diamond sales.
But the two sides have gone through 1996 with no formal trade agreement and have functioned via a February memorandum which De Beers said Russia had violated with secret gem exports.
"We have been extremely patient and have respected Russia's current interests," Raymond Clark, general director of De Beers' Moscow representation, told a news conference.
"Moreover we would have probably continued (with the interim deal) had the contract been respected," he said, citing what he called "major leakages" of Russian gems onto world markets.
He declined to say how large the leaks were, adding, "We only know that the total of the leaks is substantial."
Logunov slammed the assertion, which is widely supported by international diamond traders.
"Let De Beers figure it out themselves -- if they can't say concretely where they're from, how do they know it's happening?
"Of course this alarming and of course we want an agreement signed. Therefore, De Beers should not push worried colleagues into a corner."
He said the Sakha republic -- where ARS is based and which has its own draft trade deal with De Beers -- had been buying up to one-fourth of ARS output, last year valued at $1.38 billion, over the past couple of years.
Clark said he did not know where the leaks were coming from but said De Beers was frustrated with the government's lack of response to a draft trade agreement presented in October.
"From that date, we have been continually knocking on their door to get some kind of response," he said. "We have had not one official statement made from the government."
Finance Minister Alexander Livshits told Russian news agencies on Tuesday that Moscow wanted to rework the agreement before signing it.
Logunov said it was ARS's task to guide the October draft deal through the government.
"We are doing this, maybe not as actively as we should -- but not because we are not interested in the agreement, but because of the situation on the territory where several processes are taking place."
He was referring to presidential elections set for December 24 in Sakha, which is also known as Yakutia.
"There are a lot of opponents to the company that have the right to sell diamonds, and this of course doesn't make things easier for De Beers," Logunov said.
But he said: "These two companies cannot part -- otherwise, it's chaos. There would be no rules to the game."
