Russia is finding the return of competitive Iraqi oil to world markets a bitter pill to swallow, but may use the occasion to revamp further its own marketing strategies to compete better, energy analysts said on Wednesday.
Russian Urals sour crude is similar in quality and composition to Iraq's Kirkuk blend and was Iraq's main competitor in the Mediterranean before Gulf War sanctions shut Baghdad out of the market.
"If I was a Russian and had a lot of crude to sell, I'd think about pricing competitively," said Sarah Anderson of Energy Security Analysis Inc in Washington.
"When you talk to Med refiners, they say they have a long history of buying Iraqi crude."
Sour Urals differentials in the Mediterranean -- pressured this week by the first Iraqi exports in six years -- have already begun to tumble.
"In an environment where Russian oil producers were really only making profits on the (world) price rise since July, Russian gains could be effectively wiped with the appearance of Iraqi oil," said Gavin Rankin, research head at Troika-Dialog.
Three Russian oil companies have signed contracts with Iraq to buy 1.3 million tonnes of Iraqi oil and are awaiting U.N. approval.
All three firms -- Zarubezhneft, NK LUKoil and Nafta-Moskva -- declined to discuss how they would market the Iraqi barrels.
Some analysts saw more than Russia's Soviet-era political associations with Baghdad and higher world prices behind the Russians' interest in signing the contracts.
"One of the reasons the Russians were keen to get involved was to get some transparent pricing for their own oil," said analyst James Bunch of Renaissance Capital.
Urals, a medium-gravity sour oil with a 1.4 percent sulphur content, comprises the bulk of Russia's exports into the Mediterranean.
Analysts said the renewed competition as Baghdad seeks to recapture customers it lost to Russia and other producing countries could spur changes in the way Russia sells oil abroad.
"Their marketing strategies have changed in recent years -- it's no longer a free-for-all," said Peter Houlder, managing director of CentreInvest Group consultancy in Moscow.
"Increasingly companies are setting up their own marketing divisions in a bid to cut out the middle man and make more money" - a trend he said Iraqi competition could fuel further.
Stephen O'Sullivan, associate oil and gas director at MC Securities in London, said producers might seek to move more oil out of the Baltics than out of Russia's Black Sea outlet of Novorossiisk to avoid price pressures from Iraqi supplies.
Russia exports about one third of its 6.2 million barrels per day output, with a third of the total leaving Novorossiisk, mostly for Mediterranean markets.
One analyst said Russian oil companies' marketing outfits abroad had already become "surprisingly sophisticated".
"They are very aggressive -- but I don't think they're making Shell nervous that they have these great trading operations."
Under the U.N. deal Iraq can export $2 billion of its oil over six months to pay for food and medicine after six years of crippling international sanctions following its invasion of Kuwait.
The strictly-monitored scheme allows Baghdad to export only from the Turkish Mediterranean port of Ceyhan and Mina al-Bakr through U.N.-approved contracts.
