Russia's Finance Ministry said on Thursday that Moscow was ready to cooperate with De Beers on a deal which a deputy minister said was vital to support the diamond market.
"The Russian Federation is further ready to cooperate with the De Beers company in the matter of continued support of the stability of the world diamond market," it said in a statement.
However, the ministry said it had received no official word from the South African group on its announcement on Wednesday that it had given the Russian government until the end of the year to sign a new trade agreement to export Russian rough gems.
The statement said the ministry, which plays a key role in the trade agreement, was studying what it termed De Beers' unilateral cessation of an agreement to sell Russian gems through De Beers' Central Selling Organisation.
De Beers had said not that it was unilaterally halting the agreement, but that if a formal deal were not reached by 1997, it would cancel its interim arrangement with Russia.
De Beers said it had made its announcement on Wednesday because its patience had worn thin over government delays in replying to the long-delayed deal.
First Deputy Economy Minister Vladimir Panskov said an agreement with De Beers was necessary.
"If this agreement is not signed, we will simply destroy the world diamond market. Neither the De Beers company nor Russia will be able to work normally without such an agreement," Interfax news agency quoted Panskov as saying.
De Beers controls about three quarters of the world diamond market and Russia accounts for about 25 percent of all rough gems De Beers sells.
A five-year deal expired in December 1995 and was replaced by a memorandum signed in February 1996.
Panskov said that in the course of work on the agreement, differences of opinion between Russian diamond producer Almazy Rossii-Sakha (ARS), domestic gem processing plants and De Beers had become clear.
"But I think that in any circumstances we cannot set off on the road of mutual ultimatums."
A senior official with ARS said the Russian government had been dragging its feet on the deal with De Beers but he thought a deal would come in 1997.
Interfax quoted Lev Safonov, first vice president of the company, as saying that if an interim agreement were broken off before a new deal was in place, the two sides would conduct trade under "other conditions".
