The head of war-torn Chechnya's oil company said on Thursday that Russia's rebellious region would guarantee the safety of a major oil pipeline across its land but demanded a cut in foreign deals that will use the link.
Khozhakhmed Yarikhanov, president of the Southern Oil Company, which is based in the devastated capital Grozny, told a news conference that an $8 billion multinational consortium that will use the link to export oil in 1997 should not worry because the pipeline was safe and sound.
"We guarantee the link's safety," he said. "But remember that with pipelines all over the world, things sometimes happen -- sabotage, technical errors, human errors."
He said Chechnya should get a cut from transit fees via the so-called northern link, which can carry 17 million tonnes of oil a year.
"The Chechen part is approximately in the same condition as the rest of the link," he said, referring to the stretch running through Grozny and linking the Azeri capital Baku to Russia's Black Sea oil export outlet of Novorossiisk.
The 13 international oil companies in the Azerbaijan International Operating Company plan to reverse the flow of the pipeline to ship up to 100,000 barrels per day (bpd) of early oil from their Caspian offshore projects near Baku from August 1997.
The consortium is led by an alliance of British Petroleum Plc and Norway's Statoil.
Protracted bloodshed and instability in the 21-month Chechen conflict have given the consortium the jitters ever since Moscow sent troops into Grozny in December 1994 in a bloody bid to rein in the breakaway region.
The oil firms, worried that exports from their big ticket investments could fall prey to a separatist war, have access to a second export route via the former Soviet republic of Georgia.
Underscoring the fragility of the region for oil investors, six foreigners working with the International Committee of the Red Cross were shot dead at a Chechen hospital on Wednesday and six ethnic Russians were killed on Thursday.
Yarikhanov, who said he had faced a cool reception at Russia's Transneft oil pipeline monopoly, which owns and operates the pipeline, and at the Fuel and Energy Ministry, said Moscow was not doing enough to resurrect the region's once-glorious oil sector.
While he said the pipeline was no worse for the war, Chechnya's production and refining facilities had been laid waste.
At least eight trillion roubles ($1.44 billion) were needed to bring the facilities back on line. Yarikhanov said financing could come from a Chechen cut in the transport fees that the Azeri oil consortium will pay to ship oil via Chechnya.
"We want our share of profits from the transport of oil across our country," he said, adding the Azeri group would pay $16.57 per tonne to send oil from its Caspian Sea platforms near Baku to Novorossiisk.
The Azeri oil consortium also includes Azeri state firm SOCAR, Amoco Corp, Pennzoil Co, Unocal Corp, Exxon Corp, Ramco Energy Plc, Russia's LUKoil, Turkish TRAO, McDermott International Inc, Itochu Corp and Saudi Arabia's Delta Nimir.
The Southern Oil Company, also called the Chechen Oil Company, had hoped to stabilise output at three to four million tonnes a year before the breakaway region descended into bloodshed.
Chechnya accounted for one-third of Soviet oil production in the 1970s, or around 22 million tonnes a year, before Moscow began tapping its massive Siberian reserves.
Refining capacity in the south Caucasian region is 20-22 million tonnes a year, but operations have ceased.
($1=5549 Rouble)
