Russia's aluminium sector will consolidate more in 1997 as domestic smelters, perplexed by limp world prices, seek to rationalise costs, a top aluminium official said on Friday.
Igor Prokopov, director of Kontsern Alyuminiy, the producers' group uniting Russia's aluminium industry, said in an interview that domestic smelters were worried about low metals prices, and he blamed what he said was speculation.
"We have been concerned by the sharp fall in prices, which is why we set up the statistical body with other major producing nations to exchange information," he said.
"But our conclusion is that the market situation is not a catastrophe. We are not going to stop output and will continue next year with at least our 1996 volumes."
He said Russian primary aluminium output this year would be 2.79 million tonnes, a 1.5 percent increase on 1995's level, and 1997 production could rise by 1.5 to 2.0 percent.
The group sees Russia's 1996 primary aluminium exports at 2.37 million tonnes compared with 2.11 million in 1995. Prokopov declined to forecast 1997 exports.
Kontsern Alyuminiy said exports of primary aluminium, alloys and semi-fabricated items over January-October had already risen seven percent from year-ago levels.
The State Customs Committee puts the rise at 16 percent.
Prokopov said he was confused by low London Metal Exchange prices and said he saw no basis for weak prices in view of supply and demand patterns.
"I can't prove there's speculation going on, but I look at the charts and these are what the facts lead me to think."
"Some noise has appeared in the West that Russia has cranked things up, which is not really true. There's no reason for the fall in prices," he said, citing lower world stocks.
But he said Russia's survival as an aluminium power was not in question, since the Siberian smelters, accounting for 90 percent of output, had captive, plentiful sources of hydroelectricity, a main cost in production.
Depressed prices would be the motor for Russian smelters to consolidate operations as they completed their transition from state-run enterprises to market-nimble corporations.
"The Russian aluminium industry should be consolidated and act as a large transnational company like Alcoa or Pechiney," Prokopov said. "We won't be like Gazprom," he said, referring to the natural gas monopoly. "But there will be three or four teams that will act on world markets."
The process has already started. Siberian Aluminium, a so-called financial industrial group, includes Bratsk -- the world's biggest smelter -- and Sayansk, Trans-World Group, Zalogbank, and Kazakhstan's Pavlodar alumina plant.
The Krasnoyarsk smelter is in a group with the Achinsk alumina plant and wants to bring Ukraine's Nikolayevskiy alumina plant on board.
"Integration could have a positive affect," Prokopov said. "It will lead to expense rationalisation, lower costs and consolidated balances. Smelters are in a satisfactory state, but we want better -- we want more resources to modernise them."
-- Moscow Newsroom, +7095 941 8520
