Russia's aluminium industry, in private hands and learning market-savvy moves in ways its former state owners never could, still holds surprise cards but may no longer terrorise world markets with sudden, secret exports.
Metals analysts said on Friday that Russia, which accounts for about 15 percent of world output, would not cut production or exports in 1997 even in the face of rising costs at home, low margins and weak world prices.
Instead, smelters -- now mostly in private hands after years of turbulent shareholder battles -- would do all they could to turn profits.
"What has happened over the last year in particular is that ownership has settled down so that you can be fairly sure of the conduits of the smelters' metal," said a senior London metals trader who declined to be identified.
"They will continue to sell the metal, come what may."
Russia, fresh off a two-year global output cutting agreement that expired this spring, seized the opportunity to restart some idled capacity and increase exports.
The increases laid to rest market talk that Russia wanted to craft a new output cutting deal to boost low London Metal Exchange prices. But analysts still wonder how much Russian aluminium could flood onto sensitive markets.
Asked if Russia had learned anything from the March 1994 memorandum of understanding that reduced global output 10 percent to draw down bloated stocks, the senior London source said, "It has not learned. I don't think they care."
Igor Prokopov, director of Kontsern Alyuminiy, the producers' group uniting Russia's aluminium industry, said 1996 primary aluminium output would rise 1.5 percent from 1995 to 2.79 million tonnes.
Production could rise another 1.5 to 2.0 percent in 1997.
The group put Russian 1996 primary aluminium exports at 2.37 million tonnes, against what it said were 2.11 million in 1995.
"Some noise has appeared in the West that Russia has cranked things up, which is not really true," Prokopov said.
But two base metals analysts said the figures seemed on the low side and Russian smelters had undoubtedly increased output.
But they have done so while consolidating sales operations to try to make more money on exports, which has introduced more transparency into deliveries abroad.
Shareholders, many of them Western commodities power houses, were having a greater hand in that transparency, since they were increasingly buying direct from smelters.
Pechiney of France, Glencore AG of Switzerland and London-based powerhouse Trans-World Metals and its units already have major stakes in Russian smelters.
Analysts said the Bratsk smelter, the world's largest, with annual capacity of about 850,000 tonnes, had major plans to modernise with the help of a top European industrial firm.
LME three-month aluminium futures are around $1,550 a tonne, clawing back from October's 2-1/2 year low of $1,305 but below a $2,195 in January 1995, the last major peak.
Prices had been even lower before Russia and five other countries -- the United States, Canada, Australia, Norway and the European Union -- signed the 1994 accord. The five said Russia was to blame because it had flooded markets with metal.
Those exports were largely orchestrated by the state, which needed cash to fill its coffers.
Now smelters say they are reining in trade and marketing operations to be closer to markets in a way that Soviet-style ministries in Moscow were not.
"Integration could have a positive affect," Prokopov said, citing expense rationalisation and consolidated balances.
Russia is an aluminium powerhouse because its Siberian smelters, which account for 90 percent of output, have endless, cheap hydroelectricity generated by rivers.
