Russia's Rosneft oil firm won a new lease of life on Monday after a Moscow court ruled it could keep its crown-jewel asset, a key Siberian oil producer coveted by a major rival.
An arbitration court said prize producer AO Purneftegaz would stay at Rosneft, ending a high-stakes tussle between Rosneft and the big SIDANKO oil company for control over the enterprise.
"The decision is key to Rosneft's survival," said Dan Lubash, managing director of Emerging Markets Europe at Merrill Lynch in London.
Rosneft, the state oil holding company which is slowly being privatised, lost most of its assets in recent years when President Boris Yeltsin carved up the once government-owned oil industry into vertically-integrated, privatised companies.
Monday's ruling could help keep Rosneft -- once Russia's number-one producer but now near the bottom of the list -- alive by letting it keep a company sitting on big untapped reserves.
"Purneftegaz is not just a promising producer now -- it has a lot of promising reserves," said Rosneft press director Vladimir Tumarkin. "We consider today's decision an act of legal justice in Russia and a victory for Rosneft."
Attractive Purneftegaz, a Western Siberian enterprise that pumped over eight million tonnes of crude in 1995, has long been the object of a corporate wrangle between Rosneft and SIDANKO.
Under Yeltsin's sweeping oil industry restructuring, a 1994 government resolution awarded Purneftegaz to SIDANKO (the Siberian-Far Eastern Oil Company) -- but a 1995 executive order shifted ownership back to Rosneft.
Vladimir Vetluzhky, an arbitration court member, told Reuters that the body had ruled against SIDANKO's lawsuit to have the 1995 decision reversed.
Purneftegaz's output accounted for about two-thirds of Rosneft's production of 13 million tonnes last year.
"Purneftegaz is much more important to Rosneft than it is to SIDANKO," said Stephen O'Sullivan, associate director of oil and gas at MC Securities in London.
Spokesmen at SIDANKO, one of Russia's top five oil majors in terms of output, were not available for comment.
SIDANKO, which energy analysts said wields little control over its key subsidiary, producer Chernogorneft, badly wanted Purneftegaz and its exports to pay off debts and taxes.
"Purneftegaz is one of Russia's most promising oil firms," said petroleum economist Rustem Shagiyev of the government's Academy of Economics. "The ruling is very positive for Rosneft."
But other analysts said Rosneft may need more to prosper in Russia's newly-competitive oil industry.
"The decision means Rosneft is still in business as a vertically-integrated oil company -- but it will need more than just one big producer to compete," said oil analyst Steve Allen of CentreInvest consultancy in Moscow.
Rosneft's other major asset is Sakhalinmorneftegaz, partner to four giant foreign energy projects in Russia's Far East.
O'Sullivan said the tug-of-war for Purneftegaz may yet continue and that SIDANKO could appeal against Monday's court ruling -- but Tumarkin said the corporate tussle had come to an end.
Purneftegaz shares barely reacted to the decision, nudging down to $2.28 on the Russian Trading System at 1445 GMT from Friday's close of $2.30.
"If the decision had been different, it would have been a major blow to Rosneft," Lubash said.
