Russia's metals sectors, key suppliers to world markets, showed varying degrees of concern about President Boris Yeltsin's latest ailment on Thursday, but most said they were no longer hostage to Kremlin health scares.
Aluminium officials were the least worried and said the Russian leader's admission to hospital with pneumonia on Wednesday would not affect production or exports.
"It's business as usual," said Galina Stelmakova, deputy director for development and investment at AO Kontsern Alyuminiy, the producers' group.
"Yeltsin hasn't the slightest relationship to the aluminium sector. If anybody has anything to do with us, it's (Prime Minister Viktor) Chernomyrdin."
Russia supplies 15 percent of the world aluminium market.
London Metal Exchange aluminium prices -- which in the past have swung on Kremlin health dramas -- ignored Yeltsin's pneumonia and hit a seven-month high of $1,602.
London palladium prices rose on Russia's continuing failure to sign 1997 export contracts with Japan, the world's largest consumer of platinum group metals, including palladium.
But a senior precious metals official said Yeltsin's illness would have no effect on the contracts -- despite the fact that Russia's precious metals industries are tightly controlled by the highest government officials.
Alexander Kulichkov, a deputy director in charge of platinum and palladium exports at export agency Almazjuvelirexport, said contracts to supply Japan depended upon the Duma lower house of parliament passing a delayed federal budget and on the government in general, headed by Prime Minister Viktor Chernomyrdin.
Nickel and copper producer Norilsk Nickel which received major support when Yeltsin signed a decree in 1996 promising state aid -- was keeping an eye on the health crisis.
"Indirectly of course we are concerned because Yeltsin did sign a decree promising help," said spokesman Sergei Vetchinin.
Norilsk is the world's second largest nickel producer and also produces platinum and platinum group metals.
Russian non-ferrous metals enterprises have not yet released official 1996 output and export figures and forecasts for 1997.
