Russia's aluminium industry has roared back to life with strong 1996 output figures and forecasts of small growth, but analysts say no new investments which could fundamentally reshape the sector are on the horizon.
"The situation for the Russian aluminium industry is quite stable and healthy," said a London-based spokesman for Trans-World Commodities, which controls major stakes in key Russian smelters.
The Kontsern Alyuminiy producers' group put 1996 Russian primary aluminium output at 2.87 million tonnes, up from earlier estimates of 2.79 million and above 1995's 2.67 million.
It said output in Russia, one of the world's top producers with 15 percent of global output, would rise 1.5-2.0 percent in 1997, but it had not yet compiled export data.
Russia's total primary aluminium capacity -- some still idle after a two-year global output-cutting deal expired in spring 1996 -- is about 3.20 million tonnes.
Russia is one of the least transparent of world producers and sensitive markets are keen to know of plans to increase or improve production.
"There was a generally-held view in early 1996 that output would fall back because of alumina shortages," said Nigel Kieser, mining analyst at Paribas Capital Markets in London.
But he said Western trading houses became more active in Russia last year to smoothe out raw materials supply problems and that the 1996 output figure was strong but not surprising.
While output may inch up this year, big infrastructural changes are not yet on the horizon -- in spite of the fact that smelters plan strategic alliances with each other and Western commodities houses are major shareholders in some plants.
"I don't see any serious investments in modernisation in Russiam aluminium in 1997," said a senior Alusuisse-Lonza Holding AG source, citing fears over shareholder rights that scare deep-pocketed investors.
Russian smelters spent 1996 complaining about rail tariff and production costs and can still only dream of the integration and long-term energy contracts that Western smelters have.
While these two items are still major factors dividing the Russian industry into the profitable Siberian smelters and loss-making plants in western Russia, other concerns will come to the fore in 1997.
"Companies are going to focus on the raw materials question a lot -- on how to get alumina," said the Alusuisse source.
Seventy percent of the region's alumina, the raw material used to make aluminium, is in former Soviet countries like Kazakhstan, Ukraine and Tajikistan, and the old planned-economy Soviet-era links that once guaranteed steady supplies have disintegrated.
Russia has only two functioning alumina plants which meet less than one third of demand, and smelters are hungrily eyeing Kazakhstan's Pavloday and Ukraine's Nikolayevsky alumina plants.
One metals source said smelters were so desperate for alumina that they were extracting it from the mineral nepheline, in a costly and obscure procedure used almost nowhere else in the world, instead of from the more traditional bauxite.
Scarce raw materials are the Achilles heel of Russia's big southern Siberian smelters, which account for about 90 percent of Russian primary aluminium output and are fuelled by vast amounts of electricity generated by Siberia's mighty rivers.
The Bratsk, Irkutsk, Sayansk and Krasnoyarsk smelters are at least 4,000 km (2,500 miles) from the nearest port-based export outlet and functioning alumina sources -- vast distances which carry expensive rail tariffs.
Russia's largest alumina plant, Achinsky, is in the region, but it is bankrupt and barely producing at any of its capacity of 400,000 tonnes a year.
