Russia's Norilsk Nickel metals group, a key supplier to world markets, said on Tuesday it was struggling with a shaky financial future despite keeping output steady at its top plant.
"We are undoubtedly in a state of financial crisis," said Viktor Feldman, deputy economics director at the Norilsk group.
Feldman singled out the high cost of maintaining social services in the inhospitable Far North of Russia where many of its leading plants are based. "Our biggest woe is supporting the social sphere, a sphere which, I might add, the government should be supporting," he said.
A senior official at the Norilsk combine, the flagship plant of the RAO Norilsk Nickel group, said the facility's output had gone according to plan, with 1996 nickel production at 100,000 tonnes and forecast flat in 1997.
Norilsk is the world's second largest producer of refined nickel, a principal component in stainless steel, and also accounts for about 45 percent of world platinum and palladium production, according to metals analysts.
But First Deputy Prime Minister Vladimir Potanin was quoted by Interfax news agency on Tuesday as saying the plant might have to issue stock to pay off what the agency said was its 1.7 trillion rouble ($300 million) in debts or face bankruptcy.
Potanin is the former head of Uneximbank, the big Russian commercial bank that controls a 38 percent state-owned stake in Norilsk from a 1995 government shares-for-loans auction.
"We are constantly improving Norilsk's financial situation," said Alexei Parshikov, director of Interrosimpex, the powerful Russian group that now handles nearly all of Norilsk's exports and is trying to streamline trading operations to boost profits.
"I wouldn't use the word crisis to describe us, because crisis is when production stops, and that is not happening. We are producing according to plan."
Norilsk officials have for the first time in years declined to provide immediate total group production results for 1996 and 1997 forecasts.
Uneximbank press relations director Yuri Oleinikov said the group had slightly overfulfilled its plan to boost nickel output by three percent and copper output by six percent in 1996, but gave no absolute figures.
The group's 1995 nickel output was 180,100 tonnes, while its refined copper output was 338,700 tonnes.
About one third of Norilsk's profits go to supporting social services in the expensive and vastly remote Far North, where four of the group's six key enterprises, including the flagship combine, are based.
"We want 1997 to be the year we stabilise, and we are doing a lot to make sure that this happens," Feldman said. "But my position does not permit me to say this actually will happen."
Potanin said Norilsk, if it did not agree to a share issue to raise capital, would be put in the hands of a special tax commission which could institute liquidation proceedings.
Oleinikov said he did not think a share issue would solve Norilsk's cash problems and called on the government to understand the logistics of producing metal in a frozen, inhospitable section of the globe.
"Our sector should have a strong state role because it is a core industry -- it supports people and, through its exports, the federal budget," Feldman said. "Production will undoubtedly continue normally -- we take a lot of measures to ensure that.
Norilsk ordinary shares had fallen 8.95 percent to $6.00 at 4.26 p.m.(1226 GMT) on the Russian Trading System.
"The state should understand that to demand too much is to cut into production," Oleinikov said. "They will not want to kill the goose that lays the golden egg."
--Moscow Newsroom, +7095 941 8520 ($1 = 5,597 roubles)
