Russia is quietly importing some Western grain to offset its second meagre harvest in a row, but traders said on Wednesday that the country was too broke to be a big presence on world grain markets this year.
A senior Russian grains source who declined to be identified said unnamed Russian organisations had quietly bought several 12,000-tonne cargoes of U.S. No. 2 corn (maize) at the end of last year, importing the grain through the Baltic port of Riga.
But other Moscow sources -- eager to preserve secrecy in a market scarce on hard information and anxious about loose talk -- talked down the prospects for imports.
"There's enough grain on the (domestic) market," said Andrei Ambartsumyan, a vice-president at big traders Exportkhleb. "Quality is a different issue. But today I don't see any significant import orders."
Wildly varying estimates of how much Russia will import after its 69.0 million tonne harvest last year, one of the worst in three decades, have kept Western markets guessing about their chances of selling to the world's former biggest grain buyer.
The Soviet government imported tens of millions of tonnes of grain in the 1970s, staging a "great grain robbery" that markets have had trouble forgetting. In 1972 Moscow emptied the U.S. grain larder by buying heavily from all the major grain exporters simultaneously.
While Russia has said markets should forget the past and the Kremlin is no longer a buyer, private companies are combing Western and Central Asian markets for supplies.
"Russia will import this year because otherwise it doesn't get the quality it needs," said Vladimir Totsky, vice-president of Russia's Grain Union, referring to the fact that much Russian wheat from the 1996 crop is unfit for human consumption.
Anatoly Manellya of the Centre for Economic Trends, a government-sponsored think-tank, put Russia's total grain imports over 1997 from all sources at 5.0-6.0 million tonnes, repeating a forecast made earlier by farm expert Andrei Sizov.
Russia's 1996 harvest saw maize output slip to 1.5 million tonnes, down more than a third on 1995 levels.
But there is no consensus on Russia's overall import plans.
"I don't think they'll go back to buying large quantities of grain," said Tom Wiley, a European Union agriculture adviser, adding that imports of ready-made food were the trend.
One prominent Russian trader estimated Russia's total maize imports over the 1996/1997 crop marketing year at only 120,000 tonnes due to falling livestock numbers.
But Agriculture Minister Viktor Khklystun said in September 1996 that Russia would import 4.0-4.5 million tonnes of maize and soymeal to supplement the 1996 harvest, with maize purchases three times higher than soymeal purchases.
State Customs Committee figures show Russia imported a robust 114,000 tonnes of wheat in December, including 30,000 tonnes from the United States. Maize figures were not available.
Analysts said Russian farmers were worried less by plummeting production levels and more by the fact that domestic customers lacked purchasing power to buy their grain.
Russia's costly and inefficient farm sector, an economic basket-case, accounted for one quarter of gross domestic product in the Soviet era and wasted up to 20 percent of grain output.
Farmers, unable to adjust rapidly to market economy ways, have seen grain output nearly halved from peak levels, and food imports now comprise up to half of the Russian market.
One U.S grains source forecast fewer winterkill losses this year and said a protective blanket of snow had kept winter crops snug and tight. But the source said warm weather and floods in parts of the Northern Caucasus grain-belt could hit output.
Analysts said prospects for higher grain output this year were muted, with the area sown to winter crops last autumn down 10 percent on 1995's level.
"The signs aren't very good," Manellya said.
--Moscow Newsroom, +7095 941 8520
