Russian oil company officials said on Friday that Moscow would not slap a duty on heavy fuel oil exports this winter, leaving traders to breathe a sigh of relief but still wary of secretive government manoeuvres.
The prospect of no restrictions on exports of mazut, as Russian heavy fuel oil is known, soothed traders who had been worried about short supplies of Russian material, which keep much of European and Mediterranean markets warm.
But while traders said they were now almost one hundred percent certain there would be no export duty, they cautioned that anything could happen in the Byzantine world of Russia.
"I am convinced that there will be no duty -- but I also know how all sorts of unexpected nightmares can happen in Russia," said a source at a European buyer in Moscow.
State oil holding company Rosneft's chief spokesman Vladimir Tumarkin told Reuters that a Fuel and Energy Ministry plan for a duty had fallen flat on its face with senior cabinet officials.
"They (the government) have decided not to introduce any restrictions," he said.
A second official at Rosneft, which ministry employees said was handling the mazut issue, also said there would be no duty.
"It is safe to say there will be no duty. It's too late. We had all expected one, but it has not come," Gennady Grigoryev, deputy head of Rosneft's financial-commercial directorate, said.
The Rosneft officials said Fuel and Energy Minister Pyotr Rodionov -- who had reiterated publicly as recently as last month that there would be a duty -- had failed to excite Kremlin officials with the idea.
"Rodionov was insisting on his position, but there are many corridors of power in Russia and he just did not score enough points with government officials to get them to agree to this," one of the Rosneft officials said.
One trader likened Rodionov's comments to "a soldier's talk designed to pump people up and reflect his interests".
"It's really possible it's true (that there will be no export duty)," said a senior trader at a European company.
"But it comes a little too late to make me happy. I'm not thinking about mazut until May or so."
Russian heavy fuel oil exports tail off sharply in the colder winter season from November to around May, as waterways and export outlets freeze and consumption increases at home.
The mazut export issue was a hot item of debate in government halls, with Rodionov's camp arguing for a tariff to bolster domestic supplies, and those against the proposal saying Russia needed fewer restrictions and more of a market economy.
Traders are conditioned to expect a Russian heavy fuel oil export restriction.
Moscow raised the export tariff on mazut to 16 Ecus per tonne from six Ecus during December 1995 to March 1996 to curb deliveries abroad. It banned mazut exports outright from December 1994 to April 1995.
"Russia has grown up," said one of the traders, adding that the decision not to levy a tariff was a triumph for Russia's new market-minded leaders over the old generation.
"I think there were a lot of people in the government who realised that such tariffs are just not advantageous."
-- Moscow Newsroom +7095 941 8520
