Russian cocoa importers hope business will be sweeter this year, but increasing competition from Western chocolate bars and a lack of precise data on buying patterns have clouded the market, trade sources said on Monday.
"The general tendency is one of growth -- we'll be buying more cocoa this year," said Yuri Granilin, supplies director at the large Babayevsky confectionery plant in Moscow. He declined to give figures.
Domestic producers are competing against a flood of Western ready-made chocolates, with the latter in an upward trend as domestic firms struggle to find recipes for success in a market economy.
The State Statistics Committee said imports of cocoa from outside the Commonwealth of Independent States edged higher to 47,700 tonnes in the first eleven months of 1996 from 47,000 tonnes over the same 1995 period.
The International Cocoa Organisation puts Russian grindings over 1995/96 flat at 75,000 tonnes for the third marketing year in a row.
One Nestle source said Russia's ready-made chocolate products market would grow 15-20 percent this year but that overall growth in cocoa imports was unlikely.
Alexander Pavlov, head of the Agriculture Ministry's food industry department, said Russia's 1996 imports of cocoa and cocoa derivatives slipped eight percent year-on-year.
"I don't think we'll see much growth this year," he said, putting imports of cocoa beans, liquor, powder, butter, grated chocolate and semi-fabricated whole cocoa bars at 130,000 tonnes, including about 75,000 tonnes of beans.
But he cautioned that figures were difficult to pin down, since some imports do not show up in the official statistics and producers had stocks left over from 1995.
Pavlov estimated that imported ready-made chocolate products comprise 10-15 percent of the domestic market for such goods.
Companies like Nestle SA, Switzerland's Andre et Cie, Cargill Inc of the United States and E.D. &amp; F. Man International Inc are suppliers to Russian confectionery plants, which now buy direct instead of going through the Soviet-era agencies that bought about 100,000 tonnes of beans a year.
"The Russian market is quite different from the U.S. and European ones," said a senior source at a major Western confectionery. "It's a question of taste," the source said, adding that three times as many Russians prefer dark chocolates to those who prefer milk chocolates.
Individual chocolate bars are a relative novelty in Russia and are having to work hard to compete with the traditional large, block chocolates, wafers and biscuits Russians love.
One source guessed the size of the bar market at 100,000 tonnes a year, but cautioned this was a rough estimate.
The market for chocolate-covered wafers and biscuits could be three times higher, while the market for small chocolate candies was possibly four times greater, the source said.
Bars, packaged for on-the-go consumption, are a relative novelty to Russians, who traditionally treat chocolate as a treat to be consumed at home or on special occasions.
"Russians are into plain chocolate; these fillings, nuts and souffles the Europeans love aren't our tradition," Pavlov said.
Moscow grocery stores are filled with imported and domestic chocolates, but the abundance does not extend to the rest of this vast country to the same extent.
Trade sources said the Russian market was in such a state of change that Western confectioners were keener to launch new brands rather than increase an existing brand's market share.
"Everything is changing really quickly," said one source.
--Moscow Newsroom, +7095 941 8520
