Russia's oil sector has staged its first real comeback by nearly closing the door on a decade of dizzying output declines, but analysts said on Monday that the troubled industry was not yet in the clear.
"The larger declines are over; is that a turnaround? Yes," said Dan Lubash, managing director of Emerging Markets Europe at Merrill Lynch, commenting on 1996 oil production figures.
The State Statistics Committee said Russia's 1996 crude oil output fell two percent on 1995 levels to 293 million tonnes (around 5.86 million barrels per day).
That is Russia's lowest crude oil output rate in nearly three decades.
But the decline is the smallest since Russia -- still the world's third-largest oil producer -- discovered its huge West Siberian reserves and pushed oil output to a peak 570 million tonnes (11.4 million bpd) in 1987.
The story has been a downhill one ever since, and double-digit percentage output declines throughout the late 1980s and early 1990s have left Russia's 1996 output at a meagre 51 percent of 1987's record level.
But the picture, as the 1996 data shows, is getting prettier.
"The fall is finally coming to an end," said Stephen O'Sullivan, associate director of oil and gas at MC Securities in London. "It's not just a flash in the pan like LUKoil -- it's clearly more broad-based."
Analysts say the recovery showed its first real signs in the second quarter of 1996, possibly as Russian producers began to cash in on a world oil price rally and jammed export outlets.
But not all analysts were as sanguine about 1996's results.
"The fact that it almost levelled out this year is significant," said a U.S. oil executive involved in the Petroleum Advisory Forum, a Moscow lobby of foreign oil majors.
"But I don't really think it means a whole lot, because there's a problem with domestic demand and with export capacity. It doesn't make sense for producers to produce as much as they can right now."
Russia's oil firms have limited export options and other domestic industries are recovering more slowly.
Russian gross domestic product fell by six percent in 1996 and industrial output shrank in every sector of the economy to plunge five percent overall, official figures showed.
Declining domestic demand spurred Russian exports outside the Commonwealth of Independent States to rise by five percent in the first 11 months of 1996 to 92.8 million tonnes.
But analysts say Russia's increasingly hungry tax-man has eaten up a large portion of the extra export earnings, leaving Russia's newly-privatised companies with little to reinvest.
Still, the export boom has spurred Russia's 13 or so vertically-integrated oil companies' appetite for growth, and both Lubash and O'Sullivan said domestic crude oil demand might pick up slightly next year.
"Any arrest in decline must be heartening and what we must be looking to see is some growth," said Martin Cocker, a partner in Ernst &amp; Young's World Energy Group unit in Moscow.
But Russia's oil companies, most heading into their third or fourth years as restructured, privatised companies, will have problems in breaking completely free of Russia's economic woes.
"It's all a function of when domestic industry turns around," said the U.S. executive. "Producers and refiners both have an incentive to export and will for quite some time."
