Russia said on Wednesday it would restructure natural gas monopoly Gazprom's operations, but Western analysts and even a junior company official said the move would leave the world's largest gas company intact.
"What Gazprom has suggested for itself is not a restructuring but a commercialisation of their services in Russia," said Jonathan Stern, vice-president of Gas Strategies in London and an expert on Russian gas.
Asked if Russia would reshape one of its most powerful companies in the formal sense of the word, Stern said: "No. But it is corporatisation in the Western sense."
Economy Minister Yevgeny Yasin told a news conference the goverment would restructure Gazprom's home operations and possibly split its domestic output and transport arms.
He said the changes at Gazprom -- whose American Depositary Receipts (ADRs) keep investors drooling -- would in no way affect foreign shareholders.
"Domestic restructuring, yes. But we will not weaken Gazprom as an international corporation," he said.
Carving up Gazprom, whose gas accounts for 60 percent of Europe's gas imports, could deregulate the firm along the lines of British Gas Plc if carried out Western style.
"There's more smoke than fire here," said Stephen O'Sullivan, associate oil and gas director at MC Securities in London. "I don't think there's any serious restructuring here.
"Third-party access is not enshrined in Russia," he said, referring to the fact that Gazprom controls 94 percent of Russia's gas production and most of its transmission but has hesitated to allow other companies sell its output.
Lira Rozenova, an economic adviser to Gazprom chairman Rem Vyakhirev, said any changes would keep the company whole.
"An Economy Ministry programme to 2000 assumes that restructuring and state regulation in the gas industry will be carried out while preserving in the medium-term the organisational and production unity of RAO Gazprom," she said.
Gazprom accounts for a quarter of world gas output and its 1996 production rose one percent to 575 billion cubic metres (20.31 trillion cu ft). It raised $429 million last year with ADRs and plans a Eurobond issue this year.
"ADR investors should be more worried about other things," O'Sullivan said, citing questions over whether Gazprom will ever liberalise trade in its very illiquid shares in Russia.
Stern said Yasin's remarks were essentially about accounting changes rather than structural ones.
"Transport units would pay the producers' units costs," he said, adding that the plan aimed to improve Gazprom finances. "The Russians don't mean what we mean by restructuring."
A senior British energy consultant said Yasin's remarks were "kite-flying by the government".
Gazprom was once an entire ministry run by Prime Minister Viktor Chernomyrdin. Analysts said the firm would owe $7-$8 billion in annual taxes to the government if it could collect 50 trillion roubles in domestic debts.
Gazprom still has friends in high places and plans to sell even more gas to Europe from vast untapped Arctic reserves. But it has come under pressure to contribute more to the federal budget.
But Moscow may lack the will to alter one of Russia's most profitable and powerful firms substantially.
"Periodically, some radical economists in Russia have suggested truly restructuring Gazprom," Stern said. "But they have always failed. The political risk of destroying the Gazprom structure is too great."
($1 = 5,612 roubles)
