Chinese interest in soymeal imports has tapered in the wake of a rally that has pushed prices above US$320 a tonne C&amp;F, traders said on Tuesday.
"There's no business above $300 (a tonne)," a trader in Singapore said.
"Everyone is lurking at $300," said another trader in the region. "If anyone is buying at $320, I want to find them."  
Reports that China had bought Indian meal for September shipment at $323 a tonne, inclusive of cargo and freight, and further for November/December shipment at around $313 a tonne were greeted with ridicule throughout the region.
Trading sources said China was staying out of the market, and that Indian meal was currently overvalued by a good $20 a tonne.
Traders gave the market a couple of weeks before prices came back to more "reasonable" levels and the Chinese resume buying.  
"The rally in India has been happening for the past couple of weeks and the market has just jumped up. Prior to that India was undervalued," another trader said.
Chinese buying halted around two weeks ago, the traders said, and domestic prices had remained firm.
Meal prices at Chinese ports were around 3,000 yuan ($361) a tonne, the Singapore trader said.
Traders throughout the Far East have told Reuters they expect China to import between one million and 1.2 million tonnes of soymeal in 1996.  
One trader said last week that 600,000 tonnes of soymeal was expected to arrive in China by mid-September.
Chinese demand for animal feed -- a principal component of which is soymeal -- was down by five to seven percent in the southern regions, a veteran trader in Hong Kong said.
Another source, however, said this did not correlate with an apparent rise in Chinese meat production of 15 percent so far this year, or with the relative stability of domestic meal and corn prices.
"There is reasonable (feed) demand," he said.  
Meanwhile, the Chinese government has yet to issue vegetable oil import quotas and licences -- though traders reported that permission was granted for three trading firms to bring in a total of 100,000 tonnes of liquid oil in mid-August.
The veteran in Hong Kong said the wait for quotas was frustrating traders who knew China was still flush with vegetable oil -- some saying current stocks could last through to the end of 1996.  
"The trading companies are long on oil, the state, Cofco (China National Cereals, oils and Foodstuffs Import Export Corp), the crushers -- everyone is long on oil," another trader said.
"Domestic oil prices are being forced up, and they are trying to clear heavy stocks," the Hong Kong source said.
Soybean oil prices in northern China have been under some pressure recently -- movements reported by the National Grains and Oils Information Centre in Shanghai show a range since early August between 7,200 and 7,800 yuan per tonne.  
"We are hoping that in a couple of months we will see some action as the stocks clear," the Hong Kong source said.
Some traders were putting oil in bonded warehouses against the issue of the licences, which usually happens well before the end of August, he said.
Customs figures reported from Beijing on Tuesday show total soyoil imports from January to July 1996 were 919,140 tonnes, with 188,626 tonnes in July alone, and 72.2 percent of the total from Brazil.
($1 = 8.3)
-- Hong Kong newsroom (852) 2843-6470
