Chinese soyoil buyers who have been selling cargoes back to the market are unlikely to unleash a flood of supplies originally destined for China, traders in the Far East said on Wednesday.
And soybeans and soybean meal have been flowing into the country, they added.
"It's logical," a Hong Kong trader said of the Chinese sell-backs. "It's not easy to sell in China and they immediately make a profit of US$10 a tonne that they definitely would not get in China."
U.S. exporters told Reuters in Chicago on Tuesday that China had resold between 25,000 and 50,000 tonnes of Argentine soyoil to two trading houses in recent days.
Uncertainty over Chinese government plans for issuing import quotas for soyoil could be behind the sell-backs, traders in the Far East said.
"I suspect they are scared the quotas won't be issued," a source in Singapore said, adding that market sentiment had swung violently from bullish to bearish in a matter of days.
"Buyers (in China) commit without downpayment, so you don't know what is going to happen about your money until the cargo arrives," another veteran China trader said.
Traders said little oil was actually on its way, and it was unlikely that washouts would become a feature of the market.
Soybeans and soybean meal were a different story, with trading sources reporting huge quantities of both commodities on the way to Chinese ports this month.
One trader in Singapore put the amount of soybean meal due to arrive in China this month at "way, way above half a million tonnes... and closer to one million tonnes".
The meal was coming from India, the U.S., Brazil and Argentina, he said without elaborating.
Another trading house source chipped in with 700,000 to 800,000 tonnes of soybean meal due to land in China this month.
He also said 430,000 tonnes of U.S. soybeans would be arriving at Chinese ports in January.
Domestic soybean meal prices had already begun to soften as the imports arrived, sources said.
One source quoted meal in the southern province of Guangdong, bordering Hong Kong, at 2,700 to 2,800 yuan (US$325-337) a tonne, down from closer to 3,000 yuan just weeks ago.
"With so much (meal) arriving and discharging, the price has already been impacted," the Hong Kong trader said.
"End-users are not very keen to talk about prices, they're going to buy on a hand-to-mouth basis because they're thinking if they buy now they have to pay cash and then pay storage.
"So he'll push the seller to the wire to get as good a price as possible," the trader said.
China's premier annual Spring Festival vacation, this year beginning on February 6, is traditionally preceded by a few weeks of extremely slow business and extremely tight cash.
Importers of soybeans were more than likely to have secured deposits from their buyers and "should be fairly safe," a Chinese source said.
