Up to one million tonnes of soybean meal is clogging Chinese ports, filling warehouses and forcing domestic prices down, traders said on Wednesday.
"There is no demand," said one U.S. trader.
Of the million tonnes estimated to be sitting in Chinese ports, either on ships or in warehouses, 400,000 tonnes is in southern Guangdong, one source said.
"The market has dropped and the buyers are stuck with the meal," the source said.
Feed mills were buying on a hand-to-mouth basis, keeping minimum stocks and hoping to squeeze desperate importers on the price, said a trader in Shanghai.
"When they find all the port stocks are consumed, they will start increasing their buying -- but that won't be for a while and who knows when," he said.
Traders polled by Reuters varied in their view of just when the stocks would dwindle to a point that will inspire buying -- the optimists said late February, the pessimists plumbed for as late as July.
In the meantime, the domestic Chinese price of soybean meal has plunged around 10 percent in the past six weeks, traders said, from 2,900-2,950 yuan ($349-355) a tonne, to 2,650-2,750 yuan ($319-331) a tonne now.
Soybean meal prices on the Chicago Board of Trade (CBOT) ended mostly firm on Tuesday, closing $2.40 per tonne higher to 30 cents lower, with March up $1.40 to $238.10 per tonne.
Thai traders reported on Tuesday that Chinese buyers of Indian-origin soybean meal had defaulted on some cargoes because the market could not absorb the huge quantities on the way.
China's soybean meal arrivals in the last quarter of 1996 were between one and 1.2 million tonnes, traders said, with loading and shipping delays pushing back the landing time of large quantities from South America and the United States.
"Our vessels with an ETA (estimated time of arrival) around mid-December all arrived in January," said the Shanghai source.
Another said his company currently had vessels in four or five Chinese ports awaiting discharge and facing demurrage charges.
A trading source in Singapore said 250,000 tonnes of meal was due to arrive and/or discharge at Chinese ports this month.
On top of that, 400,000 to 500,000 tonnes of soybeans would be discharged in China before the Lunar New Year vacation begins on February 6, he said.
"It will be interesting to see how all this is absorbed by the market," another trading source said.
Overbuying in 1996 and delayed arrivals were compounded by a decision in December by Heilongjiang province to allow the sale of unprocessed soybeans to other parts of the country for the first time in more than three years.
Heilongjiang, in the far northeast, is China's biggest soybean producer, with 1996 output estimated at 4.135 million tonnes, down slightly from 1995.
While prices in the province had suffered from the moratorium, the decision to lift the non-value-added sales ban had had little impact on farmers' prices, the U.S. source said.
The Shanghai trader, however, said that fundamental demand in China for beans as food, rather than feed, kept prices steady.
"In Shanghai now, prices are 3,000 yuan (per tonne) for beans, and of that 2,600 goes back to Heilongjiang. That's not bad," he said.
