Chinese zinc producers are expected to take advantage of high international prices to export, though  this may lead to a domestic supply squeeze and firmer prices at home, Far East metal traders said on Monday.
With London Metal Exchange (LME) zinc prices having risen by around $50 a tonne since the start of 1997 to the highest levels in nearly two years, Chinese producers are seen accelerating sales, they said.
Three month LME zinc was little changed at $1,137/39 a tonne in early trade in London on Monday, after a kerb close of $1,139 on Friday. The market was seen consolidating after a blistering rise that peaked last week at $1,157.
Already this year, Torch Metal in Hong Kong, which sells on behalf of Chinese producers, has exported 30,000 tonnes of Chinese zinc to end-users "because the price is right," a company source said by telephone from the British colony.
None of this metal had gone to the LME warehouse in Singapore, he said, adding that Torch had a further 50,000 tonnes of zinc to sell in the course of 1997 and would not hesitate to take advantage of price rallies.
A Chinese trader in Beijing said one of the major smelters had sold between 20,000 to 30,000 tonnes of Chinese metal in late December at 9,800 yuan ($1,180) a tonne FOB (free on board) southern Chinese ports.
That metal was exported after the government wiped out the five percent zinc export tax on January 1, 1997, he said.
"That zinc was sold before the rally, but it was still quite expensive," he said.
A futures trader with a state Chinese firm in Singapore said Chinese producers who sold into the market before price rises could well deliver their metal to the LME to record a paper loss, but a healthy profit in the cash market.
"They (producers) would only look at the premium picture," he said. "If physical sells at a nice premium, they could sell their LME position, and sell physical based on LME prices plus a nice premium," he said.
Sources in Asia said LME price levels over $1,150 a tonne would make Chinese exports worthwhile.
"If the price goes up further, the quantity of (Chinese) exports will move up," a source in China said.
That echoed the view of a number of traders in China, Hong Kong and Singapore polled by Reuters.
Some said it could lead to another round of boom-bust trading that saw domestic Chinese zinc prices rise to 10,700 yuan ($1,289) a tonne, ex-smelter, two years ago.
The Beijing trader said China had 250,000 to 300,000 tonnes of zinc metal available for export this year.
China exports around a quarter of its annual zinc output.
Official figures show 1996 exports of unwrought zinc and zinc alloys rose to 226,777 tonnes, over 1995's 191,526 tonnes. December 1996 exports alone were 29,519 tonnes.
"We always believe Chinese metal will pressure the market," another Chinese source said. "Most people will see a good chance in the price rises."
But he said that once Chinese zinc producers saw they could get attractive export prices for their product, they could desert their domestic customers.
"This will squeeze domestic supplies, then domestic prices will move up, then it makes more sense to keep the metal at home because the prices are better," he said. "Here we go again."
The Beijing trader said special high grade zinc accounted for around 30,000 tonnes of Chinese exports so far this year, with the same quantity of high grade metal.
Up to 70 percent of the exports had gone to end users, he and other sources said, much of it to Japan.
Under its General System of Preferences (GSP) programme, Japan exempts metal imports from developing countries submitted for customs clearance before the April 1 start of the fiscal year. ($1=8.3 yuan)
