China's beer and beverage market has such enormous potential that aluminium can makers already have installed capacity in the country which is double their currents needs, an industry executive in Hong Kong said.
By the turn of the millenium, China's two-piece aluminium beverage can requirments could hit eight billion cans a year, Terry Cartwright, managing director of Crown Can Hong Kong Ltd, said in a recent interview.  
"If we look at the market in round numbers, the market is about five billion (aluminium cans a year)," Cartwright said. Installed capacity in China and Hong Kong -- which feeds the mainland market -- is now about 10 billion cans a year, he said.
By 1997, Crown Can's four plants in China and one in Hong Kong will give the company one quarter of the world's fastest growing beverage can market, with a capacity of 2.5 billion cans a year, he said.
"We're very confident about the (Chinese) market, obviously there is huge potential there," Cartwright said.  
"The market is growing and is growing quite well, and certainly the demand will catch up with can supply."
Average annual consumption in China had grown from 4.2 billion cans a year in 1995, to an expected five billion this year, he said.
"The increase in the beverage market has been 25 percent in the past year," Cartwright told Reuters.
"Whether that will continue is a very hard call. We are predicting a total market of about 8.5 billion (cans used annually) by 1999."  
By then, he added, installed production capacity for the China market should have reached 15 billion cans a year.
Cartwright's forecast would imply a rise in Chinese refined aluminium demand for beverage can production to about 140,000 tonnes by 1999 compared with roughly 85,000 tonnes now.
Can capacity expansion will continue until the end of 1996, Cartwright said, as manufacturers race to import necessary capital equipment before taxes of up to 50 percent are imposed.
The Chinese government cancelled tax concessions on capital equipment imports on April 1 this year, he said. The grace period lasts until the end of the year.  
"Obviously all the major can manufacturers want to become established in the Chinese market because the potential is huge," he said.
"So can manufacturers that wanted to become established have also wanted to ensure they put capacity in prior to the end of the duty concession period.
"There has been a big expansion over the last couple of years and it will continue to grow because capacity that has been installed now will be commissioned this year or next year," he said.  
Consumption of canned beverages in China still impressively trails that of Western countries -- consumption in the United States, for example, is around 300 cans per capita a year compared to China's four per capita.
China's beer market, however, is expected to overtake that of the United States by 2000, Cartwright said, to become the world's biggest.
China's 1995 per capita beer consumption was 12 litres (21 pints), just one-eighth of the U.S. figure, the official Xinhua News Agency reported.  
Beer production figures for 1995 have variously been reported by official Chinese sources as 15.46 million and 21.4 million tonnes.
Xinhua has also said China's 1.2 billion people would be drinking 30 million tonnes of beer by 2000.
These sort of figures, no matter how flexible Chinese reporting might be, augur well for the can makers.
"At the moment, the beer market is dominated by returnable bottles, but cans are gaining market share quite significantly," Cartwright said.  
"So obviously as the market develops and cans become more predominant, then the potential for the market is huge."
-- Hong Kong newsroom (852) 2843-6470
