Chinese sugar processors have begun hoarding their white sugar in the hope that prices will improve after the two-week lunar new year holiday, traders and industry watchers said on Wednesday.
"Now the factories are reluctant to sell because they want the price to stabilise at a level where they can at least recover their costs," said a Chinese trader in Hong Kong, just returned from the southern sugar-producing region of Guangdong.
"The factories are holding on to their product, storing it in their warehouses, in the hope that the price will improve after the holiday," he said by telephone.
Wholesale prices for white sugar in China have not moved above 3,800 yuan ($458) a tonne for some weeks. The cane harvest continues and the factories are flush with processed sugar.
Breakeven point for the factories, which process cane into coarse granulated white sugar, is around 4,000 yuan a tonne.
Traders in China and Hong Kong polled by Reuters said no movement in prices could be expected just before the new year, when the entire country closes down.
"The Spring Festival is very long and holidays are anything from a week to a month in some places, so the market will not change," another Chinese trader said.
Guangdong and neighbouring Guangxi are China's principal sugar-producing provinces. Total sugar production for the current season is expected to be 6.6 million tonnes.
The cane harvest ends in late March and crushing will continue until around May, after which prices traditionally begin to strengthen.
China's annual sugar demand has been put at eight million tonnes.
One industry executive in Australia told Reuters that with the industry having told itself Chinese demand will hit 14 million tonnes a year by 2005, maybe it is time to look at why demand has remained constant for the past few years.
"The (Beijing) government is able to control the industry in terms of what comes in, what goes out and to a large extent to influence prices through official procurement channels," he said from Sydney.
"So maybe it is time to ask if it is also the case that the government controls demand," he said. "China is not like India, where the government would fall if there is no sugar to put in the tea."
Other trading sources have said that as sugar is not an integral part of the Chinese diet, it is a flexible commodity. People will buy it when it is available and won't miss it when it is not.
Factories were not immediately concerning themselves with government pronouncements that domestically produced sugar would be procured for central reserves in order to shore up prices, traders said.
Nor was there any concern about imports as nothing was expected to arrive in China before the middle of the year.
The central government said it would permit sugar imports of 690,000 tonnes, which would include tonnage imported under barter deals with Cuba.
But traders and producers around the region have said they expect China to import at least 1.5 million tonnes of sugar in 1997.
