China's sugar factories could ease their financial woes by taking advantage of Far East demand and exporting to Asian users but they are unlikely to be given the go-ahead soon, trade and industry sources said on Wednesday.
Chinese producers, most of which are burdened by low prices and high debts, could earn $15-20 a tonne exporting white sugar to the region, a trader with a Western bank in Hong Kong said.
Recent Indonesian purchases of Thai sugar had tightened regional supply, which could mean Asian buyers will have to look elsewhere for their sugar, he said.
"If you take the Thai white sugar out of the market, other importers will need to find a place for sugars, so you could find interest coming from Sri Lanka, Bangladesh, the Philippines," he said.
"And that's when China will come in as a replacement," he said.
But that wasn't likely to happen any time soon, an official of the China Sugar Association told Reuters.
"The international prices are not at a level we could be happy with," he said by telephone from Nanning, capital of Guangxi province where most of China's sugar is produced.  
Traders in Hong Kong said the current premium on white sugar over raw was $70 a tonne, but Far Eastern white sugar had a further $20 because of the cheaper regional freight rates.
The association source said the Chinese government had agreed to buy locally produced sugar for central reserves in the hope of shoring up prices still well below break-even point for the factories.
These guaranteed sales would help factories, most of which had to repay bank loans at the end of the season, he said.
Guangxi's sugar reserves currently held 700,000 to 800,000 tonnes, he said. The national figure was not available.
Central reserve sugar would not be released on to the market before ex-factory prices hit 4,400 to 4,500 yuan per tonne, another trader in Hong Kong said.
Wholesale prices had not moved above 3,800 yuan ($457) a tonne for two months, the sugar association source said, speaking anonymously. Breakeven point for factories was 4,000 yuan a tonne, he said.
Domestic demand has been flat for the past year or so, the official said, so it was difficult to predict when prices would start to firm and factories could see some profit.  
Traders said they hoped prices would firm once the harvest and crushing season finished in late March.
Sugar prices had been expected to firm in the lead-up to the Lunar New Year holiday, China's premier annual festival when confectionary demand traditionally soars.
This was not the case this year, said Asian traders just returned from their five-day break.
Slack demand for the festival compounded on-going flat consumption of soft drinks, sweets, ice-cream and other sweet luxuries that has kept China's annual sugar demand figure to around eight million tonnes in recent years, a trader with a Chinese firm in Hong Kong said.
He blamed China's sluggish economy. "If people are watching their pennies, they are not going to want to spoil themselves."
Chinese sugar demand should pick up as the summer approaches, he said, but it will be six to eight weeks before the factories see higher than break-even prices.
China's current sugar crop has been officially predicted at 6.6 million tonnes, a figure most traders polled by Reuters agreed on, though one put it closer to 6.3 million tonnes.
Imports, which central authorities have said will be 690,000 tonnes in 1997, are not expected to begin before mid-year.
-- Shanghai newsroom (86-21) 6279-7004
