The death of reform architect Deng Xiaoping is not likely to herald changes in China's influential role as a buyer and seller of grain on the world market, traders and industry sources said on Thursday.
"As long as the current policies keep inflation down and the farmers are making money and the city people are eating -- hey, nobody would change that policy," a Western agriculture trade official in Shanghai told Reuters.
Grain traders, industry executives and diplomats throughout the Asia-Pacific described China's current agriculture policies as a legacy of reforms introduced by Deng in 1979 and accelerated in the past five years.
"He was the man that got it going," said a grain trader in Singapore, referring to Deng's policy of freeing farmers from the yoke of collective farming and state-set prices.
"I think there will be a continuation of the policies put into place when he first started his reforms and that have been maintained and expanded on for the past four or five years," he said.
Deng died late on Wednesday from respiratory failure. He was 92.
One of China's major policy objectives has always been grain self-sufficiency.
But trade sources said that China's agricultural gurus have realised they need some supplementary imports to meet total national needs and were now defining self-sufficiency as producing 95 percent and importing five percent of annual needs.
Bumper harvests in recent years, and a ban on some exports, have allowed China to build up grain reserves and keep market prices stable.
A North American marketing source noted China's bumper 1996 grain crop of 480 million tonnes and along with other sources said China had the potential to further boost yields and efficiency.
"If you look at agricultural output over the past 15 years, there has been very impressive progress and while there is some doubt about the Chinese target of producing 500 million tonnes of grain a year by 2000, it is not impossible," he said.
Total grain imports in calendar 1996 were 12 million tonnes, down 42 percent on the 1995 figure, official figures show. Exports rose last year by 42.3 percent to 1.43 million tonnes.
Canada sold China more than four million tonnes of wheat, about 40 percent of its needs, in the August 1995-July 1996 crop year, the North American source said on condition of anonymity.
This year, he said, Canadian wheat sales were expected to remain at about that level.
China's 1996 wheat imports were 28.3 percent down on the year before, to 8.3 million tonnes, State Statistical Bureau figures show. The 1996 wheat crop was a record 109 million tonnes.
The North American source said China's grain imports were based more on a need for variety than for quantity.
"China will import high quality wheat so makers of high-end food products get the quality of flour they need," he said.
Australian grain industry sources voiced concern over China's use of import tarrifs and permits.
"There's good reason to be concerned about where China is heading (on import permits) in general," said a trader in Sydney. "That was the case before Deng's death and remains after."
A U.S. oilseeds marketing source in Shanghai said, however, Chinese authorities seemed to be aware that duties and costs associated with permits had an inflationary impact -- and keeping prices down is a major government objective.
"They are in a state of almost experimental flux all the time," he said. "It's often a case of two steps forward, one step back -- and that means they are learning," he said.
