Old and young couples waltzed around the sunny marble plaza of Shanghai's People's Square on Thursday, many of them oblivious to the death of paramount leader Deng Xiaoping.
"I didn't know, but death befalls all men alike," a 70-year-old man said, quoting an ancient Chinese saying.
"The government has prepared for the transition for a long time," he added, before gliding off with his partner in time to music blaring from huge mushroom-shaped speakers.
People gather in the square every day to dance and exercise.
There was general apathy in Shanghai about the death of the man who led China for 18 years. The news that Deng died on Wednesday was first broadcast on Shanghai radio at 6 a.m. on Thursday (2200 GMT Wednesday) and on television an hour later.
"I heard the news when one of my neighbours stuck her head out of the window and shouted it to all and sundry," one young man said. "That happens whenever there is big news -- I can't remember what the last big news was."
Shanghai television stations broadcast programming beamed directly from Beijing's China Central Television, replaying over and over the news of Deng's death being read by black-suited announcers.
Shanghai radio stations broadcast dirges and historical accounts of Deng's contributions to China's political, social and economic development.
One station played speeches by the gravel-voiced Deng, whose pragmatic reforms transformed China from Stalinist state to economic powerhouse.
In Shanghai, China's biggest city and economic hub, many people were confident the government was well-prepared for a smooth transition of power.
"Chinese people are now more interested in evolution than revolution," a university graduate in his mid-twenties told Reuters. "The government's priority is social stability.
"Deng was very conservative, even Stalinistic in his thinking, so now maybe we will see younger people, people with more understanding of the way the world works, coming to the fore," he added.
"But change won't come for some time. The leaders will want to consolidate their positions before they make any changes," he said.
For one 16-year-old the greatest sadness of Deng's passing was that the elderly leader would not witness the handover of the British colony of Hong Kong to the mainland in mid-year -- one of his goals -- or see the rapid development of Shanghai.
"Deng came to Shanghai in the early 90s and told us to make great progress from year to year," he said. "Now he won't be able to see just how well we are doing."
"We have confidence in our leaders that things will be okay and that they are well prepared for the transition," said a middle aged woman exercising in the warmth of a sunny Shanghai morning.
"The markets will drop. I guess that will bring some good opportunities to make money," a taxi driver said when asked what difference Deng's passing would make. "But I don't buy shares so it makes no difference to me."
Shanghai's B share index fell sharply at the opening on Thursday morning on the news of Deng's death, but was up by the midday close by 0.29 percent to 65.318 points on volume of 21.245 million shares worth $8.62 million.
Brokers said heavy bargain-hunting and institutional buying that came in after the low opening was behind the rises.
"Whatever changes there are immediately after Deng's death, they won't have a lasting effect," another driver told Reuters.
"Give it a couple of days and everything will be back to normal," he said.
