The death of Deng Xiaoping is unlikely to shake the so-called Shanghai Gang of technocrats allied to President Jiang Zemin, analysts said on Friday.
They said the group could rely on Jiang's continued patronage, in part because of the talent of its members.
"Shanghai is a pretty important place, therefore you'd expect people who have made it up to a certain level there to move on up," said a Western diplomat.
Shanghai, China's biggest city and its economic heart, represents the success of Deng's forward-looking policy of integrating the country's economy with the rest of the world.
The city attracts a major share of China's foreign investment and many analysts see Shanghai moving to regain its 1930s mantle as Asia's most important financial and cultural centre.
Most high-profile of the Shanghai's stars are economic tsar, vice-premier Zhu Rongji and fellow vice-premier Wu Bangguo.
Political pundits in the city are looking for signs of who will be the next to join the club of former Shanghai officials to heed Jiang's call to join him in Beijing.
Officials say privately that both Shanghai Mayor Xu Kuangdi and local Communist Party chief Huang Ju are heading for senior posts in the capital later this year.
One official said he expected Huang to be given a role in the party discipline area while Xu would take a job dealing with the economy.
Current vice-mayor Chen Liangyu is seen as the most likely successor to the mayor, while analysts in Shanghai lean towards the view that Huang will be replaced by someone from outside Shanghai.
The central government wants to keep a steady rotation of officials from different regions to prevent the local administration becoming too independent, analysts said.
Past and recent movements of senior Communist Party officials from Shanghai to senior posts in the central government have long been viewed as attempts by President Jiang to tighten his grip on power.
But many of those in the loosely knit group are not Shanghai natives. Jiang, for instance, was not born in Shanghai, though he cut his political teeth here.
"The people he is going to feel most comfortable having around him are the people he worked with," said an analyst.
But their abilities in the task of running a modern government are probably even more valuable, the analysts said.
Shanghainese are perceived as competent administrators and canny business people.
"The Shanghainese do have a reputation for being very skillful at administration and business," said a Shanghai-based diplomat.
"And that's where China is right now -- they need competant people, people with management experience. And the management experience in Shanghai is one which is needed in the centre," he said.
The move late last year to Beijing of Shanghai's vice mayor in charge of the economy Hua Jianming fitted into this pattern, analysts said.
Hua was widely respected for his management and administrative skills, said an Asian diplomat, "and he was brought into the centre to use those skills".
"The Shanghainese clique are simply very expeditious at implementing other people's vision because, essentially, they are technocrats and that's what China needs," said a Western analyst.
