China's national flag flapped at half mast along Shanghai's famous waterfront Bund on Friday as a mark of respect to late patriarch Deng Xiaoping and residents remembered a man who made their lives better and more certain.
Shanghai's press noted the stability of the local share markets in the wake of Deng's death late on Wednesday.
Both share market indices ended the day higher.
Life in China's largest city was largely normal on Friday but just as precaution, police increased their presence throughout Shanghai's sprawling suburbs.
The city's 14 million residents woke on Thursday to the news Deng had died on Wednesday night at the age of 92. For many residents, it has taken time for the significance of his passing to sink in. Most on Friday remembered him as a reformer and a strong leader.
Deng's sweeping market reforms have served the city well, returning it to its former glory as China's financial and industrial powerhouse and boosting the fortunes of its proud residents. His long rule has also brought a long period of stability to the port city.
And stability is the key for many people in Shanghai.
"Our country is peaceful and stable because of Deng Xiaoping," said Gao Jixing, 53, a driver for a Japanese bank, in an oblique reference to the turmoil of the 1966-76 Cultural Revolution.
"Now there are basically no problems and we have a lot of confidence that the policies he introduced, his efforts to reform China and open up to the outside world, will continue without change," Gao said.
For Li Qi, 33, from rural Shandong province, Deng Xiaoping ended China's tradition of struggle and left behind the foundation of a new political and social system.
"He did a lot of things Chinese leaders have never done, such as retiring early," Li said. "He has set an example that other Chinese leaders can follow."
Participants at the annual session of the Shanghai People's Congress, the local parliament, paid tribute to the man who had led the country for 18 years, the Business News said.
Deng was praised, too, for his decision to establish the Pudong New Area, a sprawling multi-billion-dollar investment zone across the Huangpu River from the Shanghai's waterfront Bund.
In the bright spring sunshine of Shanghai's famous riverside boulevard, overshadowed by the foreign-built trading houses from another era, Chinese from all walks of life expressed their sadness at the passing of a great statesman.
"Without Deng Xiaoping, our country would still be as poor and as chaotic as it was just 50 years ago," said a middle-aged man, with a tiny red-and-gold button of former leader Mao Zedong pinned to his lapel.
"Look at these buildings," he said, his sweeping hand taking in the scene behind him. "Foreigners built them for us. If Deng Xiaoping had not let us build up our country, we'd be like Russia is now -- no law, no social stability and no effective government."
Jiang Wei, 26, a dealer at the Shanghai Securities Exchange, said she was saddened by the news of Deng's death.
"But look at Shanghai's share markets, they are stable and Deng Xiaoping's death cannot change that," she said.
Deng's influence on the vast majority of China's 1.2 billion people -- its 800 million peasants -- had been immeasurable, according to a group of construction workers from Deng's native Sichuan Province.
They had left the land, they said, and like tens of millions of other Chinese peasants had headed for the big city in search of work and fortune.
"Deng's reform policies have really made life much better for the peasants," said 28-year-old Duan Weisheng.
"And things will get better, there is still progress to be made," he said.
