While he ruled China, Deng Xiaoping politely declined the worshipful personality cult that grew up around his predecessor, Chairman Mao Zedong.
With his death last Wednesday, however, the floodgates were opened for what could be the start of the "Deng market" as books, posters and comics featuring the patriarch swept into stores ahead of his funeral on Tuesday.
In Shanghai, China's fast-beating mercantile heart, more than 80 branches of the state-run Xinhua bookstore had taken delivery of glossy Deng posters to meet anticipated demand, the Liberation Daily said.
Thousands of sets of the pictures, entitled "The Architect of China's Opening, Reform and Modernisation -- Deng Xiaoping", had been flown to Shanghai from publishing houses in various parts of China, it said.
Elsewhere, the People's Daily reported that "people old and young, men and women, including officers and soldiers of the People's Liberation Army and young students" had waited in line for hours in Beijing to buy Deng portraits.
The state's rush to push out Deng memorabilia follows long years during which China's 1.2 billion people rarely saw even a photo of their paramount leader.
After the excesses of Mao worship during the 1966-76 Cultural Revolution, Deng made a clear break in leadership style by insisting on a low public profile. On retiring from his last official post in 1991, he dropped almost completely from view.
There was a brief burst of Deng propaganda in 1992, when he successfully overruled communist hardliners and pushed his capitalist-style economic reforms to a new pitch. After that, however, Deng vanished again from the public eye.
His death at 92, however, freed Deng's heirs to make the most out of his political patronage and China's state stores and news media were ordered to begin cranking out memorials and mementoes as quickly as possible.
In one store in Shanghai, a city which has benefited greatly from Deng's reforms, biographies, collections of Deng's thoughts on socialism and economic development -- and handbooks explaining them -- were selling well.
"China has hope because of Deng Xiaoping," said one 73-year-old man poring over a selection of Deng's works at a bookshop on the city's premier shopping street, Nanjing Road.
He was buying a book for his grandson, he said, and had chosen "Xiaoping Says -- What is Socialism", which for 7.60 yuan ($0.91) uses simple cartoons to explain Deng's theories.
"He was the greatest leader China ever had," the man said.
"Look at what he did -- he brought the country out of chaos, he came up with the 'one country, two systems' theory for the return of Hong Kong, and he retired early. A truly great man."
Britain returns Hong Kong to China at midnight on June 30.
