China's role as an important world trading partner is a legacy of reformist leader Deng Xiaoping, but the hard task of fully opening the country's food markets remains, diplomats and analysts said on Monday.
As U.S. Secretary of State Madeleine Albright arrived in Beijing declaring it her mission to draw China into the international fold, the sources said that on agricultural trade, China still had a long row to hoe.
Restrictions on trade in grain and other agricultural products have often been seen by trading partners, especially Washington, as political barriers to a more open Chinese market.
Quarantine issues loom large in Sino-U.S. trade, with U.S. grain officials saying, for instance, that Chinese restrictions aimed at keeping out a fungus called TCK smut deny the United States of annual wheat sales worth up to $500 million.
A high-ranking U.S. diplomatic source in Beijing said talks on this and similar issues appeared to be making progress.
The hard part, he said, would be prying open the state-controlled grain trade.
"The hard work is going to be state trading monopolies," he said.
"Allowing access to the market, getting away from restrictive licensing and quotas, allowing others to participate in trade, allowing the Cargills and the Continentals to import and distribute on their own account -- all this remains to be done."
The senior representative in Asia of a major U.S. grain trading house agreed, but said progress was a long way off.
"It is something we have been campaigning for for a long time...that China's import markets and domestic distribution of grains and grain-related products should be open to foreign participation," he told Reuters on condition of anonymity.
"I don't know that we have any great hope that there will be changes in the short term," he said.
He and other sources in Asia said Chinese authorities were beginning to face the fact that grain imports would always be necessary and that it would be acceptable if China could supply 85 to 90 percent of its own grain needs.
Total grain output in 1996 was a record 480 million tonnes, with a state-set target of 500 million tonnes by 2000. Total grain imports for 1996 were 12 million tonnes, down 42 percent on the previous year.
The diplomat said China's cotton industry has slowly been eased into the world at large as authorities realised it is cheaper to import than pay Chinese farmers prices that are higher than those on world markets.
"One of the arguments we keep making is that when you continue to force people to produce at high prices, it fuels inflation," the diplomat in Beijing said.
Deng Xiaoping's forward-looking reform policies recognised that "no nation is an island", another trading source said.
High tariffs as well as licencing and quota systems had been relaxed on intermediate commodities such as vegetable oil and high-value products such as apples from the U.S. state of Washington.
While movements on China's entry to the World Trade Organisation (WTO) did signal some hope that Beijing will open its markets, trading and diplomatic sources were not sure any changes would take place in the near term.
"It is our big hope that somehow WTO will provide the leverage for this to happen, but it is not the universal panacea," the trading house representative said.
"It is an evolutionary process, not a revolutionary one."
