Amid pictures of unimaginable brutality -- of soldiers holding aloft severed heads, of young girls strapped to chairs while being raped -- lies the truth about Japanese war atrocities in China, says author Shi Young.
Shi, whose book "The Rape of Nanking (Nanjing): An Undeniable History in Photographs" documents one of the most controversial episodes of recent Chinese history, is collecting material for an exhibition to be held this year in the U.S. city of St. Louis.
The book and the exhibition, he said, set the record straight about the events of 1937 that came to be known as the Rape of Nanking, then the capital of China.
"Our aim was accuracy," Shi said in an interview while en route through Shanghai to Nanjing, as the city is now called, to interview survivors of the massacre on video and to collect artifacts from the Nanjing Museum.
Shi said the video-taped interviews and artifacts will be included with photographs from the book in an exhibition to be held later this year at the Holocaust Museum in St Louis. The date has not yet been set.
Among the people to be interviewed was Liu Xiuying, one of 10 survivors of the Nanjing massacre now demanding US$813,000 each from the Japanese government as compensation for their suffering at the hands of invading troops.
Now 79 years old, Liu appeared in a Tokyo court in February and told how, as a pregnant 19-year-old in 1937, she was attacked, raped and stabbed 37 times by Japanese soldiers who left her for dead. She lost her baby the following day.
Shi is also updating the book for a second edition, he said. The first print run of 7,500 copies published last year is close to sold out.
PICTURES OF HORROR WERE SOLDIERS' SOUVENIRS
Shi and fellow author James Yin spent two years collecting more than 400 photographs that depict the horror of the Japanese occupation of Nanjing, many taken by Japanese soldiers as souvenirs of their experiences.
The "souvenir" pictures were kept by two Chinese men who worked in a Nanjing photo processing laboratory where the soldiers took their film to be developed, Shi said.
"Japanese soldiers enjoyed what they did to Chinese people -- there are photos of them smiling," said Shi, a Beijing-born Chinese who has lived in the United States for 16 years.
"They used live people as bayonet practice targets," he says, pointing to a blurred and grainy picture in the book.
"These soldiers," he continues, holding up a picture of five Japanese soldiers squatting around the body of a man, "dug out the heart of a Chinese to be an appetiser that goes with wine. They ate his heart and they took these pictures as souvenirs."
The book's major achievement, Shi said, was arriving at the exact number of Chinese people slaughtered by Japanese troops in the two months after Nanjing fell, on December 13, 1937.
Using information from a wide range of sources, including diaries kept by Westerners living in Nanjing at the time and inscriptions on mass graves -- the authors conclude that 354,780 Chinese people died in the massacre that followed.
"This number does not include 'small' killings, where a family is killed here, a dozen or so people there," he said.
"And it doesn't include rape killings. The Japanese had a habit of killing women after they raped them, and those can't be counted because we don't know where they are buried.
"So (in the book) we're only talking about mass killings -- 300 or more in one go," he said.
JAPANESE WARTIME ATROCITIES A FESTERING ISSUE
The issue of Japan's wartime atrocities in China and elsewhere in Asia has festered since the end of World War Two.
Anti-Japanese feeling in China still runs deep, not only among people old enough to remember Japan's 1931-45 occupation, but among young people too.
A survey of 15,000 people, most of them under 40, carried out by the China Youth Daily last year found that more than 40 percent of young Chinese have a negative impression of Japan.
More than 80 percent of the people surveyed said the first thing they thought of when Japan was mentioned was the Nanjing massacre, recent press reports on the survey said.
More than 97 percent said they could not tolerate Japan's repeated attempts to whitewash its wartime atrocities, and 56.1 percent of those surveyed characterised Japanese people as "cruel", the survey found.
Beijing puts the number of Chinese killed and wounded during the Japanese occupation at 35 million.
Lack of accurate and objective information has given successive Japanese governments an excuse for denying responsiblity for atrocities such as those committed in Nanjing as well as the use of women as sex slaves, now euphemistically known as "comfort women", Shi said.
But the on-going clamour for apologies and compensation had "accomplished very little so far", he said.
It would be better to direct that energy towards educating people about the truth of the atrocities, he said.
