The traffic did not come to a standstill and the portable phones did not stop trilling, but throughout China's biggest and richest city, pockets of people stood in quiet tribute to their late leader Deng Xiaoping.
The eulogy to Deng, who died last Wednesday aged 92, was broadcast live from Beijing's Great Hall of the People on a giant screen on the edge of Shanghai's People's Square.
Hundreds of people crammed onto traffic islands and grassy knolls nearby, straining through the glare of a hazy Shanghai morning for a clear view as President Jiang Zemin read a tribute to his predecessor.
Funereal music poured from the giant bank of speakers flanking the screen, flooding surrounding streets and the square opposite with a sombre wave of grief.
"Of course, Deng is responsible for building our country into what it is today," said Gu Qi, 65, who watched the screen from the vantage point of the rickety balcony of his tiny flat opposite.
Gu said he and his wife had lived in the apartment for more than 30 years, watching Shanghai's transformation into the mercantile centre of China's new, market-style economy.
"He was an old man, so he had to die sometime, didn't he," the recently retired Gu said of Deng, whose reform policies China from a Stalinist backwater into an economic powerhouse.
"We're thankful for the changes and the progress," he said. "But life goes on, doesn't it?"
Behind him, on the big screen, President Jiang wiped tears from his eyes and intoned in a slow, measured voice: "The people of China love Comrade Deng Xiaoping...we miss Comrade Deng Xiaoping."
As three minutes of official mourning began at 10.00 a.m. (0200 GMT), during which sirens were to sound nationwide as a mark of respect for the man who led the country for 18 years, life in Shanghai proceeded much as usual.
In the People's Square area of Shanghai, there was no sign of sirens or horns being blown in tribute.
Only the incongruous sight of a lone crying man carrying a poster of the late leader and a bouquet of yellow chysanthemums drew a crowd on nearby Xizang Road.
He walked to his bicycle and prepared to ride away as police -- whose presence was thick and obvious for what one of them called "a sensitive day" -- ushered the crowd away.
Shanghai stock traders said trading on the city's exchange did not stop to mark the day. But they said volumes dropped dramatically during the hour of the funeral, with many traders and customers watching the live television broadcast.
Shanghai's grain and metals exchanges shortened Tuesday morning trading hours for the funeral.
Share indices on both the Shanghai and Shenzhen stock exchanges were up at midday, but volumes were down because of the funeral, brokers said.
Shanghai's newspapers gave wide coverage to the public display in Beijing on Monday of the patriarch's body, with photographs of Jiang consoling family members.
