China has set realistic targets in its 1997 budget but analysts said on Sunday that debt-ridden state-owned enterprises and high unemployment remain thorns in the government's side.
A 1997 budget deficit target of 57 billion yuan ($6.87 billion), was, at less than one percent of gross domestic product (GDP), a "very healthy level and good for a developing country," said Hoong Yik-Luen, head of China research at ING-Barings.
Finance Minister Liu Zhongli, in his budget report on Sunday, announced a 7.2 percent cut in the budget deficit from 61.442 billion yuan in 1996, which was itself 10.8 percent below target.
"Very few countries in the world today have a budget deficit around one percent of GDP," Hoong said.
"If you look at the United States, it is probably three to four percent, so they (China) are doing better in terms of budget deficit control than a lot of First World countries," he said.
The government's use of domestic bond issues was a clever and thoughtful way of soaking up China's surplus cash for domestic investment, he said.
China issued a total of 196.742 billion yuan in debt last year, 1.485 billion yuan above the targeted figure and an increase of 27 percent over 1995.
The 1997 target for domestic and overseas debt announced by Finance Minister Liu is 248.596 billion yuan ($29.95 billion), up 27.3 percent on the 1996 figure.
One analyst in Shanghai said government authorities "are realising there is a lot of money domestically" as bank deposits far outstripped bank loans.
By issuing domestic bonds -- though minute in value compared to developed countries that issue domestic and international debt -- the government was able to soak liquidity back into the system.
"If you look at the fact that all the bond issues were sold to domestic investors, then basically it is not an external debt problem," Hoong said.
"It is actually recycling domestic savings and moving the money from people's hands, preventing them from spending and thereby accelerating inflation, and bringing that money back to the government," he said. "Then the government relies on domestic savings to invest domestically."
Another analyst in Shanghai said one reason for the popularity of bonds was the lack of investment alternatives.
"One of the reasons that bank savings outstrip loans is because there is a lot of money in the system and people want to get some kind of return on it," she said.
"The other problem is that the lending rate is too low. The banks could be lending a lot more than they are and they could be doing it very productively if they were allowed to do their own lending," she said.
This was due in part to China's tight credit policy of the past few years, she said. While credit would probably be eased in 1997, bank deregulation was not on Beijing's agenda, she said.
Stability, however, was a top government priority, especially after the death last month of Deng Xiaoping, whose 18-year leadership steered China from Stalinist backwater to economic powerhouse, analysts said.
After three years of belt-tightening aimed at slowing growth that threatened to spin out of control, China should now be concentrating on such pillars as infrastructure development to create jobs and kick-start the sluggish economy, they said.
China's estimated 100,000 state firms reported their first ever combined net loss in the first quarter of last year, but a banking source said the economy's reliance on them has fallen from 100 percent before 1979 to around 40 percent now.
The need to retrench up to 150 million people had been factored into the government's long-term economic policies, he said, and for the sake of stability could not be done overnight.
"It has to be done slowly," another of the bank analysts said. "And we would prefer it to be slow because if it is too hasty it could result in some very unproductive mergers."
She and others put real national unemployment at close to 15 percent.
The 1997 target for urban unemployment unveiled in Sunday's budget was three percent. China's official urban unemployment rate was 2.9 percent at the end of the third quarter of 1996, with no figure available for all of 1996. Officials have said the figure could be around seven percent.
An inflation target of six percent for 1997 was realistic and achievable after 1996's 6.1 percent, Hoong of ING-Barings said.
"They have shown they feel comfortable with the inflation rate," he said. "The question now is stability and stability will come if everyone has a job."
