China's aluminium can makers are facing a tough year in 1997 as surging world metal prices force costs up while domestic Chinese demand has yet to catch up with capacity, industry experts said on Wednesday.
Profit margins for manufacturers in China of aluminium beverage cans have fallen over the past couple of years, Western and Chinese industry sources said.
Now that aluminium prices on the London Metal Exchange (LME) are at their highest point in more than a year, China's can makers are facing a further squeeze on profits, sources said.
"The wholesale price of an aluminium can is about one yuan (12 U.S. cents), which leaves around 0.1 yuan profit," an official with the China Packaging Technology Association, an industry body with interests in domestic can makers, said.
"Competition in the industry is so severe that any factory with capacity of 600,000 cans or less faces bankruptcy," the official said by telephone from Beijing.
He suggested the central government was considering lowering the import duty on aluminium, currently 15 percent, in order to help the industry.
This could not be immediately confirmed, though industry sources said they had been lobbying for the cuts.
One senior industry executive described current aluminium can prices as "below sustainable levels".
But with demand for canned beverages growing by anything up to 30 percent a year, the long-term outlook is the key, industry sources said.
"Prices are generally below what we would like to see -- it is a case of waiting for demand to catch up with capacity," said Terry Cartwright, managing director of Crown Can Hong Kong Ltd.
Crown Can has four plants in China and one in Hong Kong with total capacity of two billion cans a year, which will hit 2.5 billion in 1998 on current expansion, Cartwright said.
"In the long-term, China is an important market and strategically, can makers need to be in China," he said.
"But it is going to be tough in the short term, particularly as aluminium prices on the LME are so high," Cartwright said.
The rises on the LME have been fuelled by speculative fund buying, pushing prices up on Tuesday to $1,701 a tonne.
This was the highest price in 14 months, up $11 from Monday and some $150 above the levels prevailing at the start of 1997.
But it is a cost can makers in China cannot avoid, sources said, as local aluminium does not meet quality standards.
According to the China Packaging Technology Association, China's current installed can-making capacity is 10 billion cans a year. This figure is seen rising shortly to 13 billion cans a year, the spokesman said.
Demand in China is rising by about one billion cans a year, and in 1996 was five billion cans, the official said.
Current output consumes about 85,000 tonnes of refined aluminium a year, industry sources have said.
Capacity has soared in recent years because of tax rules that allowed manufacturers to import capital equipment duty free until late last year, and in some cases to the middle of 1997.
"It is true that people were perhaps pulling forward their expansion plans ahead of the imposition of duty, and that is what accounts for the increase in investment in the can making industry in China," another Western industry source said.
"But there has been tremendous investment in the soft drinks industry in China. It has gone up dramatically and that will certainly be matched by investment in the can-making industry in the long term," he said.
