Indium, one of the few minor metals to survive the end of the Cold War with demand intact, is now in short supply as Chinese producers have either oversold or are hoarding stocks as prices soar, traders said on Friday.
Traders in China and Japan, the world's biggest consumer of indium, said Chinese producers seemed unwilling to sell at current prices, instead waiting for further rises.
Indium, a by-product of zinc, is used in the manufacture of semi-conductors and liquid crystal displays (LCD).
China is Asia's biggest producer, according to one trading source.
Japan uses about two-thirds of annual world supply, with 80 percent of that used to make LCDs, a Tokyo market source said.
Japanese consumption slumped 38 percent in 1996 to 43.5 tonnes, pressuring on prices, he said.
But with an improved economic outlook and a revival in the high-end electronics industry, indium demand is picking up and world supply is tightening.
Figures for China's annual output are not available. One trader said it is not a major world supplier of indium but in a tight market its output counted.
"Chinese producers have sold out, in effect they have oversold, so I don't think we will see anything available before late April/early May," a Chinese trader in Beijing said.
"Chinese producers are now looking for $290 a kg," on a free-on-board (FOB) basis, he said.
The price for 99.99 percent indium ingot was quoted in Rotterdam last week at $220/250 a kg.
Chinese indium is arriving in Japan at $280-300 a kg, inclusive of cost, insurance and freight (CIF), the Tokyo trader said.
Far East traders said they have been waiting for spot prices for indium to hit $300 a kg, as there was no perceptible pickup in Chinese production after the Lunar New Year holiday in February.
A European source in Hong Kong said he recently bought a few hundred kg of indium in the belief that prices are on their way back up to the levels of two years ago, close to $500 a kg.
"The market has seen those levels before and is not afraid of them," he said.
The Chinese trading source said that Chinese factories were now shipping against old contracts but were asking for a premium over the contracted price.
Other traders said long-term contracts were being delayed, with some reporting that Chinese suppliers were attempting to re-negotiate prices.
Some suppliers were also reneging, they said.
"We have had that experience," a source at a Western company said.
"So in this atmosphere people are very wary and we are still pushing for our own deliveries," he said.
Another Chinese trader said there were sources of indium in China and Hong Kong but these were unlikely to seep into the market until prices firmed more dramatically.
"When the price rose to $400-500 a kg in 1995, a lot of Chinese companies were thinking it would go as high as $700 and they bought a lot of material at $400," the source said.
"Some of them are still holding, waiting for the price to go up again so they can clear their books," he said.
"So there is material and we will see some come out but there won't be a flood because producers have oversold, they will want to clear their old contracts first.
"In the meantime, there are a lot of people knocking on our door looking for indium," he said.
