China is unlikely to take delivery of Thai sugar bought in the past month because import licences have not been issued to Chinese buyers and local prices are too low to make imports viable, traders said on Wednesday.
"People got excited, but China is not importing sugar," a trader with a big U.S. house in Hong Kong said.
Sugar cannot be imported to China without a licence.
"There are no import licences at all being issued, it is all in the hands of (Beijing's central food trading arm) Ceroils. Prices are still pretty low, so I don't see any movement on imports," the bank source said from Hong Kong.
Since February, China has reportedly bought four cargoes of Thai raw sugar for tolling, or processing and re-exporting, traders said.
But a trader with a European bank said the Chinese purchases had been overstated by two-thirds and in fact stood at 25,000 tonnes bought on licence.
The licence had been issued to the local government in China's Himalayan region of Tibet.
Other traders also had mentioned the Tibetan import licence for 25,000 tonnes of sugar, issued in order to allow the government of the impoverished region to sell the commodity on the local market and make some money. This could not be officially confirmed.
Thai raw sugar premiums have firmed recently on the news of China's purchases, and traders throughout the region were caught out, having predicted China would not import sugar until the second half of 1997 when traditional market shortages would begin to bite.
Far East traders had said they did not expect to see China buying sugar on the international market before then. Some sources questioned whether China would import at all this year.
Recent buying by central authorities from Guangxi, China's major production area, would have boosted central government reserves, probably to about 10 percent of annual consumption, or 700,000 tonnes, one trading source said.
This could be released onto the market if prices, currently around 3,900 yuan per tonne, go up to 4,500 yuan which is unlikely before August/September, he said.
Some industry sources were sounding smug on Wednesday, having done their sums and seen that even importing at good prices was not an economical option for Chinese buyers currently.
Imported sugar is subject to 12 percent import duty and 17 percent value-added tax, which would be added to the cost of the Thai raws of $250 a tonne, plus a $30 a tonne premium, the trading source said.
Processing would push cost per tonne to above 4,000 yuan in a climate where market prices are below that, the head of a joint venture processor in Gaungxi said.
"If they can import and toll and sell for 4,200 then they can buy back some sugar at the current levels and then they can still make a margin and a little profit," he said.
"But at the moment, the price is not high, so how can they make money?" he said.
With the sugar cane crushing season in full swing, Chinese markets are flush with processed sugar and prices have been soft for some months.
Wholesale sugar prices in the southern growing regions have yet to reach break-even levels for the factories, the Guangxi joint venture manager said.
Ex-factory prices in Gaungxi were seen at 3,950-3,980 yuan ($476-469) per tonne. Break-even is above 4,000 yuan.
"There is an upward trend and hope is on the horizon," the manager said, adding he expected sugar prices to move to 4,000-4,100 yuan ($482-494) a tonne within the next 30 days.
Prices were likely to stabilise at that level before shortages kicked in around August and September, he said.
($1 = 8.3 yuan)
