China's flagship futures bourse, the Shanghai Metal Exchange, has ambitions to become Asia's premier metals trading floor, but economic realities are holding it back, the exchange's president said on Friday.
Total turnover since the exchange opened in May 1992 has topped 180 billion yuan ($21 billion) and efforts at regulation have curbed speculation, Hu Yuezheng said in an interview.
The exchange's 120 members include China's biggest base metals producers. All of them, along with the central government, now use the exchange's prices to monitor the market, Hu told Reuters.
Measures introduced in 1994 and 1995 to reduce speculation on the exchange had cut turnover to 230 billion yuan last year, from 455.8 billion yuan in 1995, Hu said.
But the introduction of several major regulations would see 1997 turnover expand on the 1996 figure, he said, but refused to make any projections.
Although greater market regulation has boosted its credibility, the Shanghai Metal Exchange still remains a long way from a place on the world trading stage, Hu said.
International metals trade is conducted in U.S. dollars, but China's yuan is not fully convertible, he said. Foreign investors are also not allowed to trade on China's futures exchanges.
China has no securities law and the quality of Chinese product lagged far behind world standards, he added.
But Hu said: "It is of course my hope" that Shanghai will become the East Asian equivalent to the London Metal Exchange (LME). Sipping tea from a Chicago Mercantile Exchange mug, Hu listed the market's current regulations, including margin requirements, limit up and limit down, daily clearance, and strict payment and delivery rules.
Limit up and limit down rules, designed to minimise risk, covered three trading days, Hu said, after which traders suffering losses of more than six percent were required to enter their losses in the exchange computer so they could be offset against gains.
"On day one, the limit is three percent, on day two it is four percent and margin requirements are then increased from five (percent) to six percent," he said.
"If it is still limit up by day three, the limit increases to five percent and the margin requirement increases to eight percent," he said.
Speculators would then be required to offset their positions, he said. And if there were no speculators, then hedgers would be required to do so.
"Why did we do it like this? Because over the past few years we have had many speculators here trying to squeeze the market and in this way we have brought some stability to the market, and our members feel their interests are protected," Hu said.
Up to 20 percent of the exchange's total turnover was now generated by producer and consumer hedging, he said.
While prices on the exchange are often move in tandem with those on the LME, Hu said Shanghai price levels increasingly reflected local fundamentals.
"At the moment there is no real relationship between the two exchanges," he said. "China's rapid economic development has seen copper demand grow and now the country must import 30 percent of its needs, now around 1.1 million tonnes a year."
"This need is what influences international prices," he said.
"There will always be contradictions between activity and regulation, but we feel it is more important to have a regulated market," he said.
($1=8.3 yuan)
