Far East metals traders said on Monday they were bearish about China's short term role in the world copper market, but conflicting signals from Chinese traders and industry officials added to prevailing confusion.
Talk has been swirling through China's domestic markets since the middle of last week that copper traders on the Shanghai Metal Exchange (SME) had been told not to sell their red metal to prevent price falls.  
Trading sources in Shanghai told Reuters at the same time that an official directive along these lines had been issued after an industry seminar in Beijing.
Shanghai copper futures opened higher on Monday on the reports, with local dealers saying the seminar had also resulted in a request that traders suspend imports and hold their own positions to prop-up prices and help loss-making state mines.
The SME's most active June contract opened at 23,800 yuan ($2,867) a tonne, up 130 yuan, before advancing further to hit a peak of 24,320 yuan.  
An official of the China National Nonferrous Metals Import and Export Corp (CNIEC) said no directives had been issued after the seminar to suspend copper imports or to order traders not to sell their copper to hold-up prices.
But the official said the firm, which is responsible for China's copper trade, had last week recommended traders hold their positions to wait for further price rises. This week he said the firm was urging traders to sell because prices were seen as favourable.  
"China at the end of the day is a net importer (of copper) and if they are talking about stopping imports you've got to believe that there is enough available on the domestic market for the time being," a Singapore trader said.
"If they are halting imports, that can be nothing but bearish," he said. "If they're not allowed to sell, that can be nothing but bearish.
"If this is indeed the case, the LME (London Metal Exchange) will come off, and you'll be sitting there with this huge arbitrage, which I cannot believe the Chinese traders will ignore," he said.  
Sources in Shanghai say warehouses in the city hold 80,000 tonnes of copper that would be available to the market.
"So there is no need to buy right now -- and if there is no buying (imports) then the Shanghai price will go up," said a local trader, adding he thought the SME price would hit 25,000 yuan per tonne in the short term.
Western traders said that if Chinese buying does not soon start in earnest -- as has been expected since Chinese New Year in February and more so as the peak summer consumption period looms -- then LME copper price would tumble.  
China's imports of raw and uncast copper in 1996 were up 32.7 percent to 714,248 tonnes, official figures show. Exports were 133,700 tonnes, leaving net imports at 580,600 tonnes.
China's copper mines are not believed to be losing money, as production costs in China are lower than in most places in the world, and current LME prices are almost twice Western production costs, trading sources said.
Another source said the emphasis of China's copper imports had shifted from refined copper to concentrate so smelters can produce their own end product for the domestic market.  
The latest Hong Kong indications of premium or discount in US$/tonne over LME cash prices on a CIF basis:
				March 17		     March 10
Copper, grade A cathode   75			   75
Aluminium, 99.7 ingot    180			  180
Lead, Chinese		 70			   60
Zinc, 99.995 ingots	80-90			100
-- Shanghai newsroom (86-21) 6279-8544
