China has missed a golden opportunity to export corn and earn millions of dollars, and now has up to a million tonnes of the grain rotting in silos in the country's north, Far East traders said on Tuesday.
"This year is going to be a major disaster," a Hong Kong trader said.
"All that corn sitting in Dalian is just rotting," he said, adding his estimate that 500,000 to one million tonnes of corn was stored in northern silos in anticipation of exports.  
Corn, grown predominantly in China's far northeastern provinces of Heilongjiang, Jilin and Liaoning, began moving to northern ports, particularly Dalian, around May, traders said.
"People had geared up for a huge export programme and I think the traditional northeast suppliers anticipated two million tonnes being permissioned for export," a trader in Singapore said.
Concern about national food security and the impact on domestic prices that exports would have in an atmosphere of acute inflationary paranoia had kept China out of the world corn market, trading sources said.  
Corn and rice exports were banned in December 1994 after stocks fell to frighteningly low levels in a country where the governing Communist Party bases much of its ruling mandate on availability and affordability of staple foods.
Imports soon began, totalling 5.18 million tonnes in 1995. Corn imports in the first five months of 1996 were 400,000 tonnes, customs figures show.
Expectations began building in April that China's central grain authorities would allow corn exports to take advantage of high world prices and also to ease a local surplus and push up softening domestic prices. Prices had dropped below $120 a tonne in some areas.
Word at the time from traders involved in negotiations with China's central grain reserve on what nature the exports should take -- barter or cash -- was that the corn would be sold mostly to Japan and South Korea at around $180 a tonne.
"There was a stage when they could have got $180, and from the inverse they could have picked up $20 a tonne selling FOB (free on board) and picking up from the U.S. six months later," the Singapore trader said. "They missed a big opportunity."  
The company was applying for the right to import and export corn "in order to solve the problem of huge corn stockpiles," an official of the company said.
Official figures put 1995 corn production at 101 million tonnes. Output in 1996 has been projected by media to hit 112 million tonnes. Annual demand is 100-115 million tonnes.
Traders and grain industry sources have said China's total corn reserves are up to 30 million tonnes.  
A few hundred thousand tonnes of Chinese corn was sold to Japan, South Korea, Indonesia and Malaysia, or bartered for equipment supplied by Japanese food processing corporations as part of joint-venture deals, industry sources said.
China's government, however, remained adamant that the export ban had not been lifted.
Officials of the newly-established Jilin Grain Group, set up by the Jilin provincial government and opened for business on Monday, told Reuters the province had its biggest stockpile in history, some three million tonnes.  
Traders said that while owners of the corn stocked at northern ports such as Dalian, Yingkou and Qinghuangdao had lost money on transport, storage and deterioration, the grain was now slowly being absorbed back into the domestic market.
-- Hong Kong newsroom (852) 2843-6470
