The manager of China's first joint venture producer of cobalt powder says the market is growing as fast as the economy and he is confident his product will wipe out local competition before the end of the century.
Since it went into production in May 1996, Shanghai Blue Lotus Metals Co Ltd has captured a hefty share of China's market for cobalt powder, Stephan Csoma, the company's general manager, said in a recent interview.
"We have the finest product on the market in China today," Csoma told Reuters. He refused to go into details about the financial strength or market share of the joint venture.
Blue Lotus is the first foray into China in a production capacity for Union Miniere SA, a Belgian metals refining and transforming giant and part of the General de Belgique group.
Its subsidiary company, Sogem, already has a significant presence in Asia as a trader of base and minor metals.
Csoma said Union Miniere had invested less than $10 million for a 75 percent stake in Blue Lotus with partner Shanghai Smelter Number Two, also known as the Jiuling Smelter.
Jiuling is one of two major smelters in Shanghai and comes under the auspices of the local branch of the national metals production giant China National Nonferrous Metals Corp (CNNC), he said.
Jiuling has been such a satisfactory partner that Union Miniere is also planning to produce zinc powder with it.
Cobalt is among the hardest metals in the world, and the powder is used in the manufacture of diamond tools that cut everything from concrete to marble and stone, and hard metals that are used to drill the earth for minerals and ore.
The powder is also used in making rechargable batteries for portable phones, computers and the like, Csoma said.
In China, with the world's fastest-growing economy, demand for diamond tools, the biggest market for Blue Lotus, was riding a construction boom, Csoma said.
Accurate figures on China's annual consumption of cobalt powder are difficult to obtain. Csoma said the market was between 400 and 600 tonnes a year.
"Our capacity is a bit above 100 tonnes today so when we get closer to 100 tonnes in terms of sales, we will increase our capacity to 200 tonnes," he said.
The eventual goal is capacity of 300 tonnes, Csoma said. Capacity equals the amount of cobalt metal used to make the powder, on a one-to-one conversion ratio, he said.
"I don't see any problem with moving 200 tonnes a year within two or three years; 300 tonnes will take a bit longer and will depend on our international customers moving into China and it will depend on how fast we can keep growing," he said.
"Last year was quite fast, we started from nothing and doubled our sales turnover every month until Chinese New Year (in February) when everything closes down," he said.
Blue Lotus manages to keep costs for its cobalt powder about the same as Chinese producers for the same grade, Csoma said.
"Today's market price is between 680 yuan and 720 yuan ($82-87) a kg," he said.
"It is higher than the international price because we have to pay import tax (six percent) and value-added tax (17 percent) on the metal," he said, adding that locally produced cobalt powder is still cheaper than the imported product.
While finding a good partner in China is half the battle won for many would-be China-investors, dealing with the competition is the hard part for Blue Lotus.
Csoma said Blue Lotus had more than 30 competitors in the local market, all with much lower overheads but all producing cobalt powder of lower quality.
"There is an overcapacity (in China)...and I believe we are going to close a lot of them down on quality, price, financial strength."
-- Shanghai newsroom (86-21) 6279-8544
