- The one million tonnes of corn rotting in storage in China's northern port of Dalian will lead to tightened local supplies and force prices up before new crop is available at year-end, traders said on Wednesday.
Up to 50 percent of the stored corn is unfit for milling, a trader in Hong Kong said.
"I'd buy Dalian futures. Prices have got to start going up," he said.  
"The price will keep going up until January (because) the new crop won't be available until then, after the farmers have dried it and then want their money for Chinese New Year. If the domestic price keeps going up, what's the point of exporting," he said.
Even if exports were an option for China's grain authorities, they no longer make economic sense, traders said.
"What's the point? The inverse has gone. You can't do any better than low $180s (US$ a tonne) into Southeast Asia now. It just doesn't work," a U.S. trader in Hong Kong said.  
He said free on board (FOB) values in Dalian were 1,400 yuan ($168) per tonne for good quality corn.
Another regional trader, whose company has joint-venture interests in China's corn belt, said southern feed millers were rejecting the Dalian corn on the basis of quality.
"There is a lot of low quality corn around. We are FOB suppliers so in an atmosphere in which the feed millers are looking for any excuse not to accept cargo, we are having to turn it back," he said.  
"In the U.S., they could blend low quality with high quality to get a medium quality product. In China they can't do that because everything is bagged by hand," he said.
"So they will just have to sell it at a heavy discount."
The U.S. trader said China's recent demand for soymeal indicated a need for corn to mix with the protein product.
"Feed values are decent," he said. "Some livestock producers are starting to gear up again and will need corn."
The Dalian corn could be absorbed into the market over the coming three months, and the poorer quality corn could be used industrially, for instance to produce starch, he said.  
Exports were first mooted in early April, when market prices fell to less than 1,000 yuan ($120) a tonne in some areas of the northeast corn belt comprising Heilongjiang, Jilin and Liaoning.
A few hundred thousand tonnes of Chinese corn did sell to Japan, South Korea, Indonesia and Malaysia, or was bartered for equipment supplied by Japanese food processing corporations as part of joint-venture deals, industry sources said.
China's government, however, remained adamant that its ban on corn exports, imposed in late 1994 when central reserves ran low, had not been lifted.  
Trade and industry sources said they saw official fears of inflation as the reason large-scale exports were not sanctioned. Of the sales that did go ahead, South Korean buyers paid $216.70 a tonne cost and freight (C&amp;F) when U.S. corn was arriving at Asian ports for more than $230 a tonne.
China could easily have sold up to two million tonnes at the time, making substantial hard currency profits and helping increase prices for impoverished farmers, traders said.  
Chinese corn output in 1996 has been projected by the official media to hit 112 million tonnes. Official figures put 1995 corn production at 101 million tonnes. Annual demand is 100-115 million tonnes.
China's corn reserves have been reported at 30 million tonnes. New crop will be harvested from late September to November, and should start arriving at market, in a dried state, a month or so after that.
-- Hong Kong newsroom (852) 2843-6470
