Chinese end-users of copper are buying the metal in small lots but Chinese trading sources said on Tuesday that high world prices would prevent any significant Chinese buying in the short term.
A fall last Friday in copper stocks held in London Metal Exchange (LME) warehouses was not fully attributable to Chinese buying, traders in China and Hong Kong said.
LME copper stocks fell 9,675 tonnes, to 187,777 tonnes last Friday amid reports that most of that material was on its way to China.
"For the time being only one third of the stock moving out of LME warehouses will head to China, because they are taking out their own material," a Chinese trader with a provincial-government firm in Hong Kong said.
A trader in Beijing with a major European trading house said China was more likely to sell copper at current prices.
LME three months prices finished the kerb at $2,367 a tonne, down just $1 from Friday's kerb close. The cash/threes backwardation was at $55/60.
"If I bought at $2,310 and I sell at $2,370, I make $60 a tonne," the Beijing trader said.
"This does suggest some speculative Chinese action on the LME, but I don't see anything major, long or short, from China," he said.
Trading sources said copper prices on the Shanghai Metal Exchange (SME) did not indicate any real tightness in domestic Chinese supply.
Figures released by the exchange last Friday showed an increase in copper supplies held on warrant in SME warehouses of 664 tonnes to 13,522 tonnes, which traders here said is about two months' supply.
The exchange is also known to have off-warrant stocks, and China's central reserve has warehouses in the city holding undisclosed tonnages.
Another Chinese trading source in Hong Kong said he was seeing some interest from Chinese end-users who were ordering in small lots of 500 to 2,000 tonnes at a time.
"Some customers in Shanghai are placing small orders and they will take the cargo because they are end-users and they need it," he said.
Another source with a Chinese trading firm in Singapore said tight cash flow would also keep smelters off the market until government funds became available later in the first half of 1997.
Trading sources in London and Asia have predicted a further fall in stocks on Tuesday of 25,000 tonnes.
-- Shanghai newsroom (86-21) 6279-8544
