A plan by U.S. car giant Ford Motor Co to increase its stake in a Chinese truck maker is a bet on the future of China's auto industry, as revitalising the Chinese partner could take years, analysts said on Wednesday.
Ford announced on Wednesday that it planned to increase its investment in Jiangling Motors Corp with the purchase of $54.5 million worth of shares.
"In the longer term it is a beneficial deal, because they (Jiangling) have been losing out in the competition for market share -- and if they don't do something they can't compete at all," said An Lu, vice president of China research at Salomon Brothers in Hong Kong.
Under the subscription agreement, Ford said it had agreed to increase its equity share in its Chinese partner to about 30 percent from the current 20 percent.
The agreement is subject to approval of Jiangling's shareholders, who will discuss it at a meeting scheduled for April 30, and China's regulatory authorities, Ford said.
Ford and Jiangling are developing a light commercial vehicle that will be launched as a nine- and a 12-seater bus, a Ford spokeswoman told Reuters. A van and a chassis cab, or pick-up truck, would follow, also produced at Jiangling's plant in Nanchang, eastern Jiangxi province, she said.
Jiangling's share of China's top-end light truck market had fallen in recent years to 15-18 percent from about 20 percent as that of its major competitor, Qingling Motors, had risen to about 21 percent, Salomon's Lu said.
He said Qingling's use of Japanese technology through its cooperative deal with Isuzu put it one car generation, or about 10 years, ahead of Jiangling.
Qingling vehicles also commanded a premium of about 10 percent because of their use of the Isuzu name and technology.
Qingling had sold about 35,000 vehicles in 1996, Lu said. Jiangling said in December it expected 1996 sales to reach 17,000 vehicles, compared to 20,500 in 1995.
An injection of Ford capital and technology for Jiangling would be a welcome step towards the future, said analyst John Lu at ING-Barings in Shanghai.
Continued economic growth would spur infrastructure development, he said, and growth of China's interior would spur demand for light trucks for passenger and goods transport.
An analyst with a western bank in Shenzhen, where Jiangling is listed, said the deal would help lower Jiangling's production costs, a substantial overhead in car manufacturing.
Some analyst sources said, however, it could be up to three years before Jiangling was able to effectively utilise the unfamiliar Ford capital and technology.
"I don't know how they will merge their two technologies," Salomon's Lu said. "Or will they choose the new Ford technology and replace the old with the new -- which would mean they have much higher start-up costs."
"Jiangling will still need at least a couple of years to get production up and running using new technology that is unfamiliar to them, and in redeveloping their market," Lu said.
The Shenzhen-based banker said the announcement of the deal should not have any effect on Jiangling's share price,
"There will be some dilution, but the effect would be countered by better company prospects," she said.
Trading in Jiangling shares was suspended on Wednesday morning on the announcement. After trading resumed, its B shares edged up slightly to HK$4.00 against HK$3.98 at Tuesday's close.
($1=HK$7.8)
-- Shanghai newsroom (86-21) 6279-8544
