Australia's Prime Minister arrives in China on Friday to redefine Canberra as a friend of Beijing, which less than a year ago accused Australia of being party to U.S. attempts to contain China, business sources said.
John Howard wants to let China know that the business of Australia is business, said Bruce Dover, general manager of PDN-Xinren Information Technology Co, a joint venture of media giant News Corp and Chinese Communist Party newspaper People's Daily providing online computer technology information.
"I think the Chinese have made it clear that if you want to do business, then business becomes the business of government and that should be the priority," Dover said.
Sino-Australian relations, warm throughout the 13-year reign of the Australian Labour Party, started to chill once Howard's Liberal Party took over from Labour in elections in March 1996.
The relationship began to sour soon after the elections with the cancellation of a financial support scheme for Australian business in developing countries followed in September by a visit to Australia by Tibet's spiritual leader, the Dalai Lama.
The nadir came in August 1996 when China accused Australia of moving too close to the United States, after U.S. Secretary of Defence William Perry described Japan and Australia as the northern and southern anchors of Washington's Asian security arrangements.
"From this we can see that the United States is really thinking about using these two 'anchors' as the claws of a crab," the official People's Daily said in an editorial.
Australia's trade commissioner in Shanghai, Richard Pillow, said he saw no impact from the political issues on Australia's booming trade with China -- Australian exports to China grew 24 percent in 1996 to A$3.896 billion ($3 billion).
"Howard's visit is a proactive move to strengthen bilateral ties," Pillow said, adding that Australian companies were on a long list of international firms wanting a slice of the Chinese pie.
Howard arrives in Shanghai, China's biggest city and its mercantile heart, on Friday evening with a business delegation that includes representatives of Australian banks, insurance firms and commodity trading bodies.
A number of deals expected to be announced during the trip, including the opening in Beijing of a branch of ANZ Bank, business sources said.
In the lead-up to his five-day China trip, Howard emphasised the importance of Canberra's relationship with Beijing and of Australia's place in Asia, and said the level of the business delegation with him reflected this.
"It is probably the most senior and most broadly based representative business group to accompany an Australian prime minister on an overseas trip," he said.
In 1996, Australia's imports from China were worth A$4.122 billion, up from A$3.861 billion the year before, Australian officials said.
($1=A$0.78)
