Far East metal traders said on Tuesday they were resigned to seeing China steer clear of major copper purchases before the end of April, when the country's high consumption season begins.
"Now is not the right time of year, I think more towards the later part of this month because that's when the season starts," said the head of a trading house in Hong Kong with smelting and refining interests in China.
Small parcel purchases of 500 to 2,000 tonnes at a time by end-users continued, he and other traders said, as they had run down inventory and had no choice but to pay current high prices.
The price of copper on the London Metal Exchange (LME) has been hovering around $2,300 a tonne for the past couple of months, as the market waits for China's annual buying programme to begin.
LME copper finished the afternoon kerb last Thursday, ahead of the Easter holiday, at $2,372 a tonne.
China's peak season coincides with the end of winter, as construction projects gear up.
"China is producing healthy amounts of cathode from its own sufficient supplies of concentrate," a trader in Beijing said. "For a short period of time, domestic production should be able to support demand."
Shanghai Metal Exchange figures show 14,828 tonnes of copper held on warrant in exchange warehouses, which local trading sources have said would be sufficient supply for two months.
Attention has focused on zinc, as Japan's window of tariff-free import opportunity from designated developing countries under its General System of Preferences (GSP) closed on March 31.
Brokerage house Brandeis said last week GSP imports of zinc were expected to reach 90,000-100,000 tonnes, compared to 84,000 tonnes last year. About 70,000 tonnes of that zinc would come from China, Brandeis said, up from 49,000 tonnes last year on expectations of higher world zinc prices spurring higher exports.
Zinc prices on the LME have hovered around 4-1/2-year highs of $1,300 a tonne for the past few weeks, with many trading sources in the region confident of seeing prices touch $1,400 in the foreseeable future.
Zinc closed on the LME on Thursday at $1,295 a tonne.
A trader in Beijing said he expected LME zinc to correct downwards in the short term before bouncing back above $1,300 a tonne.
"After that I think there will be a consolidation and we could see the price move above $1,400 even in the first half of the year," he said.
He and other sources in the region said China has begun to move substantial quantities of zinc to LME warehouses in Singapore, with estimates of 20,000-25,000 tonnes on the way.
China's major smelter, Huludao in the northeastern province of Liaoning, was producing 10,000 tonnes of special high grade zinc ingots a month despite annual capacity of 330,000 tonnes, a Chinese industry source said.
Technical problems were keeping production of high quality exportable ingots down, he said.
"The goal is to do as much special high grade as possible but there are problems with the wet electrolytic process that mean they cannot clean the liquid properly and the impurities are higher than they should be for special high grade," he said.
Sources at China's other major smelter, Zhuzhou in Hunan province, and at one of its trading representatives in Hong Kong have said it plans to gear up production to take advantage of the high world prices.
Chinese producers are also known to move zinc to Singapore to use as collateral for bank loans. In this case it does not necessarily appear on LME warrants, traders said.
