Hong Kong's pro-Taiwan community flew Nationalist Chinese flags across the territory on Thursday to mark Taiwan's national day for what could be the last time before China takes over in mid-1997.
As champagne glasses clinked amidst the laughter of hundreds of guests, Taiwanese hosts and well-known artistes flown in for the grand event in the posh Regent Hotel fronting the Victoria Harbour, many wondered if they would be able to celebrate in the same style next year.
"We don't know about next year, we have to see how the future Hong Kong government decides," Zheng An Guo, general manager of the Chong Hua Travel Agency, Taipei's de facto mission in Hong Kong, told reporters.
Hong Kong, a British colony for over a century and a half, reverts to Chinese rule on July 1, 1997. Under its Basic Law, a mini-constitution which takes effect from the handover, is a clause that Hong Kong must observe the "one-China" principle.
Communist China regards Taiwan as a rebel province since the Nationalist government fled to the island after losing the Chinese civil war in 1949 and has long sought to push the island into diplomatic isolation.
"I'm not sure what the future is for the celebration of the Double-ten event next year but we really want to continue if we can, even (if it is) within some other format," said Zhang Su Hui, a Chong Hua spokeswoman.
She added the form of the event next year and the fate of future Hong Kong-Taiwan relations would have to be sorted out through high-level cross-straits negotiations.
Pro-Taiwan sources believe the post-handover authority is likely to prevent flashy celebrations of the event -- known as "Double-ten" because it falls on the 10th day of the 10th month -- and to bar public display of Taiwanese flags and gatherings.
While the continued existence of the de facto Taiwanese mission is less in doubt -- so long as it abides by rules -- the raising of the Taiwanese flag, representing clear skies, white sun and the earth flushed with redness of the warrior's blood, would probably not be allowed.
"This is very clear, and the principle is very clear... after 1997, Hong Kong must abide by the 'one China' principle as laid down in the Basic Law," said a spokesman with Xinhua, Beijing's de facto embassy in Hong Kong.
Asked if raising of the Taiwan flag after the handover would contravene the Basic Law, he said, "It should be. After 97, this matter according to the Basic Law would be enforced by the Hong Kong government, the central (Beijing) government would not interfere in this matter."
