Norwegian engineer Kvaerner ASA has set its sights on increasing its Asia Pacific portfolio in coming years where burgeoning economies are taking on more sophisticated technology, a senior official said on Friday.
"Our turnover would be up by about 10 percent in 1997, and 50 percent (of the increase would be) generated by Asia," said John Fletcher, chairman and managing director of Kvaerner Corporate Development, the group's corporate development arm.
Total turnover in 1996 would hit US$10 billion, of which 35 percent would be generated from Asia, Fletcher said in an interview. Asia made up less than 10 percent of the company's annual turnover in the early 1990's, he added.
Kvaerner's half-year results in August showed a sharp 56 percent fall in pre-tax profit to 706 million crowns on turnover of 22.94 billion crowns.
Kvaerner, Norway's second largest listed company and an employer to 60,000 worldwide, took over British conglomerate Trafalgar House in April and moved promptly to integrate Trafalgar's engineering and construction units.
Its new organisation framework revolves around six core areas of shipbuilding, process engineering, oil and gas engineering, construction, metals and pulping.
Fletcher said Kvaerner's business was currently very strong in India, Indonesia, Thailand and China.
Kvaerner's involvement in China goes back 40 years and partook in developing the country's steel industry over the decades, Fletcher said.
On hand now are over 30 projects in China -- spanning industrial hardware, power generation, and steel for mostly joint venture companies led by international shareholders -- worth some US$500 million, and the amount was set to increase to US$750 million in 12 months' time, he said.
The company is eyeing a tender expected to open by end 1997 to build hydro-turbine engines for the giant Three Gorges dam project, which would be awarded at the end of 1997.
"Kvaerner is involved in a (proposed) consortium on the Three Gorges project whereby the first set of turbines would be manufactured by Kvaerner and the second set would have local manufacturers involved," Stephanie Chick, business development manager said at the interview.
Fletcher dismissed China's ongoing austerity measures and credit clampdown as "cyclical" and believed the country was now poised to move to some "good years".
The company also has about 30 orders on hand in Indonesia and is involved in building a US$450 million, 120,000 tonne per year facility in Thailand to produce refined copper wire that is scheduled to come on stream in 1998, Fletcher said.
-- HONG KONG NEWSROOM (852) 28436441
