The sentencing of Chinese dissident Wang Dan to 11 years in prison in Beijing on Wednesday sparked fears in Hong Kong about curbs on freedom when the territory reverts to China next year.
More than 100 demonstrators marched to China's diplomatic mission in Hong Kong to protest against the verdict and a human rights group vowed to lobby for a resolution to be passed at the United Nations condemning China's human rights record.
"Wang Dan is innocent. Release Wang Dan," protesters shouted as they marched to the headquarters of Xinhua news agency, Beijing's de facto embassy in the British colony.
There they joined other campaigners in a candle-lit gathering.
A Beijing court found the 27-year-old Wang guilty of conspiring to subvert the government after a trial lasting only four hours. Xinhua said the trial proved he had received funds from hostile overseas forces, aided the families of jailed dissidents and set up an "opposition force" by uniting illegal organisations.
Wang had earlier served four years for his role in the 1989 pro-democracy demonstrations in Beijing crushed by the army with heavy loss of life.
"We worry that the Chinese government (would) apply a similar standard in Hong Kong," legislator Bruce Liu of the Association for Democracy and People's Livelihood said.
Hong Kong Governor Chris Patten said: "I recognise the very considerable concern that many people in Hong Kong, and many people around the world, feel about a sentence imposed on a young man for activities which in most places, including Hong Kong, would be entirely legal."
"By any legal standards, today's trial of Wang Dan was a farce," said Robin Munro, director of the Hong Kong office of Human Rights Watch Asia.
"Clearly, its sole purpose was to put Wang Dan behind bars for as long as possible with the minimum legal fuss and bother."
While Hong Kong has been promised a high degree of autonomy for the next 50 years under a Sino-British handover treaty, many doubt whether the freedoms now enjoyed will be preserved.
Munro said his organisation would lobby the United States and European countries to pass a resolution at the United Nations condemning the human rights situation in China.
