The sentencing of Chinese dissident Wang Dan to 11 years in prison in Beijing on Wednesday sparked fears in Hong Kong about curbs on freedoms when the territory reverts to China next year.
Hong Kong activists denounced the verdict, and a human rights group vowed to lobby for a resolution to be passed at the United Nations condemning China's human rights record.
A Beijing court on Wednesday found the 27-year-old former student leader Wang guilty of the capital offence of conspiring to subvert the government.
Wang, who faced a potential maximum penalty of death for the charge, was also stripped of political rights for two years, a typical Chinese punishment for critics of communist rule.
The verdict, at a trial lasting less than four hours, raised an outcry in the British colony, which returns to Chinese rule in 244 days.
"We worry that the Chinese government (would) apply a similar standard in Hong Kong," legislator Bruce Liu of the Association for Democracy and People's Livelihood said.
"Then the freedom of Hong Kong will be limited and (people) will be charged if we openly criticise the Chinese government."
Pro-democracy activists who staged an overnight vigil in front of Beijing's de facto embassy in Hong Kong shouted slogans when they heard the news about Wang on the radio.
Robin Munro, director of the Hong Kong office of Human Rights Watch Asia, said the trial was extraordinarily short for what was deemed the most serious offence in China's criminal law.
"By any legal standards, today's trial of Wang Dan was a farce. Clearly, its sole purpose was to put Wang Dan behind bars for as long as possible with the minimum legal fuss and bother," Munro told Reuters.
"What more evidence does the international community now need before it will wake up to the fact that (Beijing) is not advancing towards a more liberal regime...but is becoming less tolerant of peaceful political opposition and absolutely determined to silence critics by any means possible?" he said.
While Hong Kong has been promised a high degree of autonomy for the next 50 years under a Sino-British handover treaty, many doubt whether the freedoms now enjoyed will be preserved.
Munro said his organisation would lobby the United States and Europe to pass a resolution at the United Nations condemning the human rights situation in China.
Hong Kong activists also planned a demonstration in front of China's mission on Wednesday night, and another on Sunday.
