China, in a bid to boost the its aerospace industry, this week put on what has been touted as the biggest and costliest airshow it has ever held.
"It has been a dream for years for China's aerospace community to host a grand international airshow," Liang Guangda, vice-chairman of the organising committee of Airshow China '96 said on Wednesday.
"(It) will demonstrate the great success of China's reform and opening-up and improve understanding between China and aeronautical communities around the world," Liang said.
The six-day airshow at Zhuhai airport in southern Guangdong province, which started on Tuesday, is estimated to have cost China 350 million yuan ($42 million), organisers said.
The show brought together 300 domestic and foreign aircraft and parts producers, including heavyweights like Boeing, Airbus and McDonnell Douglas.
Held over a 53,000 square metre site overlooking the South China Sea, China put on show its premier jet fighter the China F-8II, and the Russian SU-27 fighter jet, of which China is known to have sizeable numbers.
And standing prominently in the large open grounds was China's space rocket, the Long March Number 2.
The event has been a venue for local and foreign aviation companies to sign joint venture agreements.
Collins Avionics &amp; Communications Division, a unit of Rockwell International Corp said on Wednesday that it signed a deal with two Chinese parties Shanghai Avionics Corp and Shanghai Broadcast Equipment Factory to develop a tracking system, normally used in aircraft, for ships and cars.
They would form a new joint venture company Shanghai Rockwell Collins Navigation and Communications Equipment Co Ltd in Pudong, Shanghai, to develop the product.
The device, called a global positioning system (GPS), can be used to track location, read tide changes and fuel consumption.
China, eager to make the airshow a biennial event, has left little to chance. Work started in May this year, beginning with building of two large exhibition halls and thousands have been recruited to put together the show, organisers said. (US$1 = 8.33 yuan)
