China would, if requested by Hong Kong, provide its support to stabilise fluctuations in the territory's financial markets after the handover next year, China's central bank governor said on Wednesday.
"In case of need, the People's Bank of China will, at the request of the Hong Kong Monetary Authority (HKMA) and in accordance with the Basic Law and market practices, provide its support," said Dai Xianglong during a dinner speech to the Hong Kong Association of Banks.
But Dai said he believed the HKMA was fully capable of handling fluctuations in Hong Kong's financial markets around the handover.
The British colony reverts to Chinese rule at midnight on June 30, 1997. Under joint Sino-British treaties, Hong Kong will maintain its own separate financial regime and currency.
Dai did not elaborate on what measures the central bank would take if the need arose.
In response to reporters questions, Dai said there was no truth in recent press reports that China was putting together a 300 billion yuan fund to help stabilise Hong Kong's financial markets after the handover.
"I don't know where those reports came from. There is no such thing," Dai told reporters at a press conference after the dinner.
China's central bank was determined to let Hong Kong run its own financial system, he said.
"The People's Bank of China will not replace the Hong Kong Monetary Authority and will not set up any branches in Hong Kong," Dai said. "Mainland financial institutions in Hong Kong will not enjoy any special privileges. They will be subject to the same supervision of the financial regulatory authorities of Hong Kong on the same regulatory standards."
He also said Beijing would not levy any tax in Hong Kong nor would it, for any reason or in any manner, use Hong Kong's Exchange Fund or other assets.
Dai said mainland companies participating in Hong Kong's market would be on the same footing as foreign or Hong Kong firms.
Addressing concerns that Shanghai would overtake Hong Kong in financial importance, Dai said Shanghai's financial status would be enhanced in the future.
"However, for a relatively long period of time, it (Shanghai) will not be an international financial centre, let alone replace Hong Kong," he said.
Dai also said there was a close business relationship between China and Hong Kong.
Hong Kong investment in China reached US$78.6 billion by the end of 1995, accounting for 58 percent of total foreign investment in the mainland.
In 1995, 90 percent of syndicated loans in China were arranged in Hong Kong and 90 percent of Chinese enterprises listed overseas chose to list in Hong Kong.
-- Hong Kong Newsroom (852) 2843 6441
