When outgoing Chief Justice Sir Ti Liang Yang joined the contest to become Hong Kong's first local leader, he opened up a competition which had been seen as a clash of business titans.
Yang, 67, resigned in September as Chief Justice in a bid to become Hong Kong's Chief Executive and step into Governor Chris Patten's shoes when the British depart at midnight next June 30.
A prim, avuncular figure, he dropped his knighthood title "Sir" in October, choosing to be addressed as "Mister".
He was knighted in 1988, the year he became the first Chinese to head the judiciary under British rule.
The former judge's nearest rival is regarded as shipping magnate Tung Chee-hwa who, until Yang joined the fray, had faced a rival businessman, Peter Woo. The latest public popularity poll gave Yang 42.6 percent, well ahead of Tung's 32.9 percent.
Woo, rated third, and former appeals court judge Simon Li, rated fourth, are regarded as unlikely winners in the eyes of the Hong Kong public, who see the two laggards more as spoilers than odds-on favourites for the leadership mantle.
However, it is not the public who will be casting the votes when the winner emerges on December 11, but the 400 members of a China-controlled Selection Committee.
Trying to prove he has the common touch, Yang made a show recently of moving out of his palatial official residence on Hong Kong's Peak, along with his chauffeur-driven Jaguar, and moved into a rented apartment.
He then went on a demonstrative jaunt around the territory on public subways and ferries. But days later when he went to tour slums, he arrived in a chauffeur-driven Mercedes.
"I never imagined they were so poor," he said after visiting a "cage home", a small room with rented caged-in bedspace that can be home to a dozen people.
Yang stresses his "neutral" background. "I have no business affiliation. I have no direct official connection with the civil service," he said.
"To that extent, I am very neutral and therefore I think I shall be able to adopt an independent view on matters and judge matters on their merits," Yang said.
Born in a privileged family and remembered by his former teachers in Shanghai as a thoughtful, intelligent student, Yang and his family moved to Hong Kong after the 1949 communist takeover on the mainland.
The soft-spoken, bespectacled Yang has promised a "moderately conservative" style of rule, without drastic changes.
"If I were to become Chief Executive, I'm at the head of a moderate, relatively conservative government," Yang said.
"I don't want to see more great challenges or great reforms over the initial couple of years after 1997," he said.
He apparently had in mind the political landscape before Patten arrived and spearheaded democratic reforms to the approval of many in Hong Kong but to China's utter fury.
Yang, a self-declared Chinese patriot, provoked a storm late last year when his misgivings about the territory's much-coveted Bill of Rights, spoken in private conversation to a senior Chinese official, were leaked to the media.
It pushed him into the limelight and attracted accusations of toadying to Beijing. Some pressure groups called for him to resign, which he promptly rejected.
Yang, who once described himself as a "bridge between the East and the West", appears to have ridden that storm, as the popularity polls indicate.
