Pro-democracy demonstrators stormed into a plush Hong Kong conference centre on Friday in an attempt to disrupt a historic meeting convened by China to choose Hong Kong's future leaders.
They were stopped by police before reaching the meeting, inaugurated earlier in the day by China's Foreign Minister Qian Qichen.
Protesters had gathered before dawn outside the Hong Kong Convention Centre where the 400-member Selection Committee was due to start its month-long mission to select the territory's Chief Executive and 60 members of a replacement legislature.
As delegates were returning from lunch, about a dozen demonstrators plunged through a side door of the convention centre and were chased up escalators by police.
They managed to reach the sixth floor, one floor away from the meeting, before at least seven were seized by police as they unfurled banners and shouted slogans.
Eyewitnesses said that two prominent members of the Democratic Party, Andrew To and Chan Kwok-leung, and independent activist Wong Chung-ki, were among those detained in the building.
In a second attempt to storm the building, three screaming demonstrators were dragged away by police on the street outside.
Scuffles ensued and at least one policeman was slightly injured when up to 40 chanting protesters surged against crowd control barriers, waving models of black coffins above their heads to symbolise the death of democracy.
Some of the demonstrators had camped overnight outside the building where Britain will formally return its colony to China in 228 days' time.
They were surrounded by police at dawn and herded behind barriers across the road.
Hong Kong's pro-democracy lobby has attacked the selection process and refused to take part in the selection committee which they have branded as undemocratic.
They are adamantly opposed to China's plan to dissolve the elected legislature and replace it with an interim provisional chamber until new elections are held.
Waving banners and using loudhailers, demonstrators chanted "We want a directly elected legislature" and "We reject the reversal of democracy".
Some of them held up black boxes, saying "This is a coffin. It represents the death of democracy and freedom in Hong Kong."
Members of the Democratic Party had planned to pass a letter to Qian but were unable to get past police lines. An official eventually came out to accept the letter.
"We hope you will exchange views with Hong Kong people on the setting up of the provisional legislature and selection of the Chief Executive," the letter said.
The Selection Committee was holding a first round of voting on Friday to narrow down the list of candidates to step into the shoes of colonial governor Chris Patten when British rule ends at midnight on June 30 next year.
To qualify, candidates for the job of Chief Executive must be nominated by at least 50 members of the committee.
Two business magnates and two former judges are regarded as the front-runners in the race. The Selection Committee meets again on December 11 to pick the winner.
