China's Foreign Minister Qian Qichen was greeted by angry protesters on Friday when he arrived to open a historic meeting to choose Hong Kong's future leaders.
Police scuffled with demonstrators when they blocked access to the Convention Centre, where Britain will formally return its colony to China in 228 days' time.
Qian will preside over the 400-member Selection Committee, which began its month-long mission to select the Chief Executive and 60 members of a replacement legislature.
A group of about 30 police surrounded a handful of student activists and herded them towards barricades where other protesters were sequestered. Many had spent the night on a protest fast outside the building.
Hong Kong's pro-democracy lobby has attacked the process and refused to take part in the selection committee which they have branded as undemocratic.
They are adamantly opposed to China's plan to dissolve the elected legislature and replace it with an interim provisional chamber until new elections are staged.
One student was pushed to the ground before being hauled over the barricades into the cordoned-off area by other protesters. "I am very frightened," the university student said. "I don't know why they pushed me."
Waving banners and using loud hailers, about 40 demonstrators chanted "We want a directly elected legislature" and "We reject the deterioration of democracy".
Police flung themselves against the barricades to hold back surging demonstrators, some of whom held up a large black box.
"This is a coffin. It represents the death of democracy and freedom in Hong Kong," one demonstrator said.
Members of the Democratic Party had planned to pass a letter to Qian but were unable to get past police lines.
"We hope you would exchange views with Hong Kong people on the setting up of the Provisional legislature and selection of the Chief Executive," the letter to Qian said.
The Selection Committee is due to hold a first round of voting on Friday to narrow down the list of candidates to step into the shoes of colonial governor Chris Patten when British rule draws to a close at midnight on June 30 next year.
To enter the final run-off for the job, a candidate must be nominated by at least 50 members of the committee.
Two business magnates and two former judges are regarded as the frontrunners in the race.
The Selection Committee meets again on December 11 to pick the winner.
