Commercial sponsors have flocked to the Portuguese enclave of  Macau to back Sunday's annual Grand Prix despite fears that China wants to steal the show.
Fans of Asia's answer to Monte Carlo fear a Formula One track, recently constructed just across the border in the southern Chinese city of Zhuhai, will seduce sponsors and signal the death knell for Macau's Formula Three race.
Macau has no special track with the race run through the enclave's twisting streets.
But the concerns have not materialised this year at least and Macau is festooned with banners, kiosks and giveaways from sponsors including French oil concern Elf, Budweiser and Corona beer, watchmaker Omega and Japanese tyre manufacturer Yokohama.
"Zhuhai hasn't really affected Macau because most of its sponsors are here for very specific reasons," said Stephanie de Kantzow, an organiser of the Macau Formula Three Grand Prix.
The annual event, about 60 kilometres west-southwest of Hong Kong, started in 1954 and many of the world's top drivers have cut their teeth on the tricky 6.2 km (3.8 miles) Guia street circuit. Double Formula One world champion Michael Schumacher, and current Formula One champion Damon Hill are past Macau competitors.
China also insists it is not seeking to edge Macau out of hosting international motor racing.
"We won't affect Macau. Macau's speciality is in the Formula Three, our aim is to host Formual One and the GT (Global Touring) Rally," Yu Binglin, vice-mayor of Zhuhai, said in a recent interview.
Elf, one of the event's major sponsors, said there was no reason for it to pull out of Macau even though another race track has sprung up in China.
"Macau has a history of automobile racing. As long as Formula Three Grand Prix exists in Macau, Elf will be present in Macau. Business and selling products is one thing, sport is another," Michael Bonnet, Elf's director of commercial activities told Reuters.
"What we wish to build in Asia are several (motor racing) schools to develop young drivers from Macau and rest of Asia ... we want to find potential champions in Asia."
Elf sponsored a Formula Campus Challenge in early November at the China Zhuhai 1996 International Race.
Royal/Dutch Shell, which lost its bid as fuel sponsor to Elf in 1995, said it would tender for the 1997 Macau race.
"Macau and Zhuhai have their individual merits, like individual tenders. Macau belongs to our Hong Kong business (budget) rather than China. We'll try to do it next year," Albert Wong, a spokesman for Shell, said earlier last week.
But China, which is determined to muscle its way into the glamourous circuit of international motor racing, is expected to give Macau a good run for its money.
Zhuhai, just 15 km (9 miles) northeast of Macau, boasts a 4.32 km dedicated racing circuit.
The Federation Internationale de L'Automobile (FIA) is conducting a study on whether its is up to standard for endorsement as a suitable Formula One venue.
FIA is also discussing with Chinese officials Zhuhai's possible hosting of a Formula One race in 1997, a senior Zhuhai government said.
"What Zhuhai has done is that it has opened up a whole new area of sponsorship. People who hadn't sponsored car racing before seem to be coming to Zhuhai to see if there's a possibility of being involved in sponsorship," de Kantzow said.
