Britain and China have agreed to work on a new anti-espionage law in Hong Kong, to take effect after the colony is handed back to Beijing next year, a Chinese official said on Friday after three days of negotiations.
Chinese Ambassador Zhao Jihua, China's team leader in the Sino-British Joint Liaison Group (JLG) talks, said the countries agreed that Britain's official secrets act would be localised.
"The official secrets act is a British law...which was extended to Hong Kong. Hong Kong has not got its own official secrets act so we are talking about the localisation of the act in Hong Kong," Zhao told a news conference.
But Beijing also warned Britain not to rock the boat by making any major legal changes on its own before the territory of 6.3 million people reverts to China next July 1.
Speaking amid heightened anxiety over the handover of Hong Kong to Chinese rule, Zhao also tried to reassure local people they would continue to have complete freedom of movement after 1997.
"For Hong Kong residents, they can rest assured that the freedom of entry and exit into and out of Hong Kong will continue to be guaranteed," Zhao said.
But Zhao said Chinese negotiators had protested to Britain about a draft anti-subversion bill unveiled by the colonial administration last week, a law that sets legal markers against China-style jailings of dissidents.
China reacted angrily to the move when it was announced. Britain has accused China of blocking efforts to draft laws on subversion, sedition and treason for the handover.
Zhao said Britain had violated the 1984 Joint Declaration, the Sino-British handover treaty, and Hong Kong's future constitution, the Basic Law.
"During the plenary session, the Chinese side pointed out to the British side that the British action is in fact unilateral change in the law previously enforced in Hong Kong without consultation and consensus with China.
"This is a breach of the Joint Declaration. This act is attempting to legislate on behalf of the future Hong Kong Special Administrative Region of China. In essense this is an act which is in contravention of the Basic Law.
"Such an act will never be acceptable to the Chinese side and the British side has to bear full responsibility for all the consequences," Zhao said.
He said Beijing hoped there would be no more "disturbances" because it ran against the aim of having a smooth transition.
"We certainly hope it won't affect our relations. But I can't deny that it will definitely affect future discussions."
