Hong Kong's lawmaking chamber suffered a blow last week when its speaker broke ranks to vie for a seat in an interim body Beijing plans to install in the territory next year, political analysts said on Sunday.
Andrew Wong, Legislative Council president, made an about-turn when he said he was seeking a seat in the Provisional Legislature, a body he denounced during 1995 elections.
But his move to join 31 colleagues seeking seats in the provisional body, which China will put in place of the Legislative Council, threatens to widen schisms already dividing the chamber, commentators said.
"Cracks which have already emerged within the Legislative Council over the bid by some members for a seat on the Provisional Legislature will widen in the next six months," said Chris Yeung, political commentator with the Sunday edition of the South China Morning Post newspaper.
Yeung warned of a flurry of motion debates, adding that "the normal operation of the Legislative Council will be adversely affected to a great extent, if not paralysed".
China, angered by a string of democratic reforms implemented by colonial Governor Chris Patten, has vowed to disband the present elected legislature and replace it with the provisional assembly when Hong Kong returns to Chinese rule in mid-1997.
On Wednesday, the Selection Committee, carefully assembled by China, is expected to choose the man who will succeed Patten as the territory's first post-colonial leader.
The committee's next task is to name the 60-member Provisional Legislature on December 21.
Wong, denounced by some fellow legislators, would not say whether he supported the Provisional Legislature, but he tried to convince reporters he would remain an impartial leader of the existing chamber.
"You ought to wait until I act partially -- and when that happens, criticise me and I will retract my decisions and previous rulings," Wong told reporters on Saturday.
While it is not yet clear how and where the future Provisional Legislature will meet and operate before it actually assumes office next July 1, observers said the existence of two lawmaking bodies cannot auger well for the territory.
"In any country, when you have two bodies from which laws emanate at the same time, there's going to be some confusion and dispute," said Michael DeGolyer, associate professor at Hong Kong's Baptist University, who is in charge of a long-term study on the transition.
"For the next six months, we're obviously going to be in a very confused state. Normally this causes all kinds of political and economic chaos."
