Parcels giant DHL Worldwide Express, which has had its foot through the door of Eastern and Central Europe since the mid-1980s, was braced to break even on growing regional business by 2000, a senior executive said.
"I would say that certainly by the year 2000 we would be in a breakeven position as a region in its own right," said Peter Davies, regional director of the European rim, during an interview with Reuters on Monday.
Turnover generated from DHL's business in Eastern and Central Europe, including the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS), would total US$155 million in 1996 compared with US$110 million in 1995, and hit US$200 million in 1997.
The breakeven comes after years of losses from the late 1980s when the region plunged into massive changes with the fall of the Berlin Wall and the break up of the former Soviet Union.
Davies, responsible for Eastern and Central Europe including the CIS, said DHL was well aware of short-term difficulties but had maintained operations in the region with its sights set on the long term.
"If you go into the market to make a fast buck, then you are in there for the wrong reason...you have to have a long term view to that," Davies said.
"DHL doesn't make a profit as such, but it's okay, we know that. We have a long-term investment plan," he said.
But staying power of the company, which employs some 3,500 people in the region, might just be starting to pay off having captured 75 percent of market share there.
Growing foreign investments by its clients in the more mature economies of Poland, Hungary and the Czech Republic as well as the CIS have meant more business, Davies said.
And in places like the former Yugoslavia where basic infrastructure and services were not well in place, delivery services were seen as particularly critical, he said.
The company has invested some US$46 million through expanding facilities and aircraft purchases in 1996 for Eastern and Central Europe and topped off another seven percent of the amount in training.
It now operates in 165 locations in the region and would add another 35 stations in 1997, Davies said.
"We have invested much, especially in the countryside and the next stage would be expansion of facilities," he said.
--HONG KONG NEWSROOM (852) 28436441
