The United States envoy in Hong Kong reminded China on Tuesday of its pledge to preserve Hong Kong's "vital" freedoms after Britain hands the colony over to China next year and said Washington would be watching.
Richard Boucher, the U.S. Consul-General in Hong Kong, stopped short of saying what his government could do for the territory if China reneged on its promises after it resumes sovereignty over Hong Kong on July 1.
"As Hong Kong heads towards the transition, the handover has been assuming higher visibility as a factor in U.S. foreign policy... It is one of the key events in Sino-U.S. relations over the next few years," Boucher said.
"We have our voice, interest and participation in China and Hong Kong. It is not a threat...but we want to first see what happens," he said in a speech to the Foreign Correspondents' Club of Hong Kong.
The freewheeling British colony of over a century and a half is promised far-reaching autonomy for 50 years under a Sino-British treaty and related documents.
Quoting the ancient Chinese sage Confucius, Boucher said a measure of whether Hong Kong was well ruled after 1997 would be if "its subjects are content and foreigners are attracted".
He reminded Beijing of its promises made about Hong Kong -- the survival of freedom of speech, press, assembly, movement, travel, religion, among others. "That is a sweeping, vital and unrestricted pledge," he said.
With only 203 days left under the British flag, Hong Kong people are nervous over the future of these freedoms and about China's plan to replace their elected Legislative Council with a provisional legislature, to be chosen this month, overseen by Beijing.
Boucher, echoing criticisms made previously by other senior U.S. diplomats, described the provisional body as "unnecessary and unjustified".
"It is important for Hong Kong to have a legislature that is constitutionally elected."
Boucher refrained from commenting on whether Hong Kong Chinese residents holding U.S. passports would enjoy U.S. consular protection after the handover.
"We do in every case offer consular protection when we can but the question of dual nationality is very complicated...and I can't give details now," he said. Some 37,200 U.S. citizens live in Hong Kong, many of them dual nationals.
Boucher also said China had signalled to Washington that U.S. Navy ships could continue to make recreational port visits to Hong Kong after 1997, although details had to be worked out.
About 70 U.S. warships call in at Hong Kong each year.
