One of Hong Kong's best-known pro-democracy politicians, Emily Lau, was dragged away kicking and screaming by police after lying down on a road to protest against China's methods of choosing a post-colonial leader.
Up to 40 pro-democracy activists scuffled with riot police outside the Hong Kong Convention Centre, where a committee of 400 chosen by Beijing voted for a chief executive to rule Hong Kong after Britain hands the colony back to China at midnight next June 30.
A dozen activists shouting "oppose the phoney election" lay down on the road and were dragged away by police.
Lau, an independent democrat fiercely critical of China's communist rulers, was among those carried off, witnesses said. It was not immediately clear if they were arrested.
Fellow legislators Andrew Cheng of the Democratic Party and trade union leader Lee Cheuk-yan were also hauled away.
"It's a sad day for Hong Kong. What can ordinary Hong Kong citizens do -- they cannot vote," John Wing-ling Tse, a legislator of the Democratic Party said.
Earlier, protesters erected a "tomb of democracy" outside the building and condemned the voting as the end of freedom and the rule of law in the territory.
Only the 400 electors chosen by China voted for the future leader. None of the rest of Hong Kong's 6.3 million people had a vote.
Several hundred pro-democracy activists demonstrated on Tuesday evening and 20 diehards camped out overnight with the imitation tomb in front of the Grand Hyatt Hotel.
As the Selection Committee members arrived in shiny limousines, their first sight was an imitation ancient Chinese-style grey arched tomb, constructed from wood.
The structure faced the Hong Kong Convention Centre with the inscription "Tomb Of Hong Kong Democracy And Rule Of Law". Candles flickered in the wind beside it.
The committee was convened to carry out the first of two historic tasks -- to elect the man who will step into the shoes of Governor Chris Patten when Britain pulls out. The clear favourite was shipping magnate Tung Chee-Hwa.
The committee's second task, on December 21, is to choose a provisional legislature that will replace the current elected Legco (Legislative Council) on July 1.
The scuffles erupted after police urged the demonstrators, from the United Front Against the Provisional Legislature, to move to a cordoned-off area.
Occasionally the group marched a short distance bearing the tomb aloft, as in a funeral procession. In front of the tomb a banner was posted saying "Death of Hong Kong Rule Of Law".
"We are against the Selection Committee's so-called election of the first chief executive," said Cheng. "The selection is not real because it is done by Beijing," the legislator said.
The protesters brandished a colourful banner with the slogan "Oppose the False Election Of The Chief Executive, Oppose The Provisional Legislature" and denounced China for not allowing Hong Kong's electorate to vote.
"This is an abuse of their human rights. Some people are more equal and have more rights. In other cultures it is always your vote that counts. In Hong Kong this is apparently not the case," Tse said.
"They say they represent Hong Kong and Hong Kong people but they are not elected. How can they represent us if they are not elected? What is an election with 400 appointees?"
