Shipping magnate Tung Chee-hwa made his first appearance in China as Hong Kong's leader-in-waiting on Thursday as Beijing prepared the next milestone in the British colony's transition to Chinese rule.
In a one-day meeting on Thursday in Shenzhen, just over the border from Hong Kong, Tung was endorsed as successor to colonial governor Chris Patten by the 150-member Beijing-picked Preparatory Committee, which is crafting the territory's political future.
Britain hands Hong Kong back to China on July 1.
Tung, 59, was selected as the post-handover leader in Hong Kong on Wednesday by a separate 400-member body carefully assembled by Beijing, smothering his two rivals by winning 80 percent of the votes.
At the Preparatory Committee meeting in Shenzhen, presided over by Chinese Foreign Minister Qian Qichen, Tung was greeted with hearty applause, smiles and back-patting as he entered the hall.
"We have already completed the selection of the first Chief Executive of Hong Kong... Tung Chee-hwa received the majority vote of 320," said senior Chinese envoy Lu Ping, director of the Hong Kong and Macau Affairs Office.
Preparatory Committee Vice Chairman Wang Hanbin urged delegates to show their support for China's endorsement of Tung.
"If you don't have any objection, then approve it by applauding," Wang said, prompting the delegates, who include some of Hong Kong's top business leaders, to begin clapping.
In a meeting with reporters later, Tung reiterated his hope that Anson Chan, Hong Kong's popular chief secretary and head of the civil service, would stay on as his deputy.
"I haven't decided on my deputy, I hope Anson Chan will stay and I hope she can be my deputy," Tung said.
Tung said he would also work closely with the current British-led government to promote Hong Kong in the final months of colonial rule and ensure a smooth transition.
Tung's selection was met with scuffles, anger and apathy on Wednesday in Hong Kong, where pro-democracy activists and politicans denounced the selection process as undemocratic and condemned the magnate's appointment.
In addition to endorsing Tung's appointment on behalf of the Beijing government, Thursday's Preparatory Committee meeting in Shenzhen will also discuss a package of procedures for establishing a provisional legislature on December 21 that will replace Hong Kong's elected chamber with the handover.
The legislature plan has been strongly opposed by Hong Kong pro-democracy groups, which see it as a move to crush freedom and introduce repressive laws.
An official said the gathering was also expected to discuss a move by Britain to introduce a lenient anti-subversion law in Hong Kong before the handover. A Preparatory Committee legal sub-group has recommended repealing the British law.
Tung has said he would take a hard line against meddling by provincial Chinese bosses who may disregard Beijing's edict that Hong Kong be a Special Administrative Region of China with considerable autonomy in governing its own affairs.
Hong Kong's Economic Times newspaper said China was expected to rank the future chief executive as equal to a state councillor.
This position, one level below vice-premier, would mean he outranks provincial governors and will help discourage interference in Hong Kong affairs by regional cadres, it said.
