China endorsed Hong Kong's Tung Chee-hwa on Thursday as the man to lead the territory after it reverts to Chinese rule in 1997.
The 59-year-old shipping magnate proved the overwhelming choice of a Beijing-vetted panel to lead the territory after the British pull down the flag, ending more than 150 years of colonial rule.
The Preparatory Committee, the 150-strong body of prominent Hong Kong and Chinese citizens established to manage the handover, extended China's recognition of Tung's new role at a session in the southern China boomtown of Shenzhen.
The endorsement was proposed by Preparatory Committee vice-chairman Wang Hanbin. "If you don't have any objection, then approve it by applauding," Wang said.
The delegates, who include some of Hong Kong wealthiest and most powerful tycoons and deal-makers, dutifully clapped in unison.
Tung, whose father fled the Chinese communist revolution in 1949, will take over the helm when the colony reverts to China in 201 days' time, at midnight on June 30.
Tung said on Thursday that China's role in bailing out his family shipping empire when it ran into trouble a decade ago would not affect his leadership.
"Gratitude is one thing. Being the chief executive is another. The chief executive has to put interests of Hong Kong people before anything else," Tung said in an interview with Cable Television.
Hong Kong newspapers, many of which had prepared celebratory issues ahead of Wednesday's poll in which Tung eclipsed his two rivals by taking 80 percent of votes cast, heralded him as proof that Hong Kong people could run Hong Kong.
Tung has said he will take a hard line against meddling by provincial bosses who may seek to disregard Beijing's edict that Hong Kong will be a Special Administrative Region of China with considerable autonomy in governing its own affairs.
Hong Kong's Economic Times newspaper said China was expected to rank the future chief executive equal in status to a state councillor.
This position, one level below vice-premier, would mean he outranks provincial governors and would help ensure against interference in Hong Kong affairs by regional cadres, it said.
Tung's victory was considered a foregone conclusion in Hong Kong, where he has been regarded as China's man since President Jiang Zemin singled him out for a pointed handshake in January.
The Preparatory Committee is scheduled to address during the afternoon session what promises to be its most controversial task -- setting the ground rules for a Provisional Legislature in Hong Kong to replace the existing elected chamber.
China, angered by the reforms spearheaded by British Governor Chris Patten, vowed to neutralise them by dissolving Hong Kong's legislature when it takes control.
Navigating this potential minefield could prove Tung's biggest immediate headache.
Opposition in Hong Kong to the new chamber is stiff and many people are deeply concerned about the confusion that may arise if two rival legislatures jockey for power in the final six months of British rule.
