Taiwan's call for a "Greater China" joint-venture bank on Wednesday was greeted with caution in Hong Kong, where analysts and businessmen said more details were needed to convince the industry of its feasibility.
"It's a good idea. There's certainly a good deal of cross-border trade through Hong Kong," said Carmel Wellso, regional banking analyst with ING-Barings.
"But most large corporations would probably have established relationships with existing banks," he added. "What value is this new company going to have?"
A leading Taiwan business leader said on Wednesday in Taipei that Taiwan, China and Hong Kong business heavyweights were considering forming a joint-venture bank in Hong Kong to promote commercial links across the Taiwan Strait.
"We have proposed the idea to our Hong Kong and mainland Chinese counterparts to jointly set up a bank in Hong Kong," Hsu Sheng-fa, chairman of Taiwan's Chinese Chamber of Commerce and Industry, was quoted by an aide as saying.
While most people in Hong Kong contacted by Reuters acknowledged the political significance behind the idea, they said business and profit were what mattered.  
"This idea is very grandiose...but in business, the priority is making money because we have to put in investments," said a Hong Kong-based businessmen with strong links to Taiwan.
"Mainland Chinese banks have many restrictions, what will this bank deal in?"
Taiwan's Hsu made the proposal in a meeting with visiting business delegations from Hong Kong and the communist mainland, Taiwan's arch-rival since a civil war split them in 1949.
The Hong Kong and China entrepreneurs were in Taipei for an unofficial economic forum, the first large-scale cross-strait contact since the Taiwan government's November announcement of a freeze on cooperative initiatives with China.
Taiwan has banned direct contact -- including banking communications -- with China since the civil war. Contacts must be conducted through a third region, usually Hong Kong.
Despite the ban and a 17-month-old deadlock in unofficial Taiwan-China talks, some 30,000 Taiwan-funded businesses have poured more than US$20 billion into investments in China since relations began to thaw in the late 1980s.
Hong Kong, a British colony for more than 150 years, will revert to Chinese control at midnight next June 30.
-- Hong Kong Newsroom (852) 2843 6441
