Hong Kong's leader-in-waiting Tung Chee-hwa returned on Thursday from meeting Chinese leaders in Beijing and pledged to get down to the serious work of shaping his administration.
Tung, a former shipping magnate, also said he won reassurances from Beijing that the territory would enjoy a high degree of autonomy after Britain hands it back to China next June 30, after 150 years of British colonial rule.
"After receiving my appointment, I'll have to face many pressing tasks ahead, meeting the governor, the chief secretary Anson Chan, picking my team," Tung told reporters.
One of Tung's foremost tasks is to form an advisory cabinet called the Executive Council and to decide which senior civil servants to keep after the handover.
"But I haven't got specific dates as I've just arrived," he said, when pressed for details on his future team.
"I'm delighted the Chinese central leadership has time and again assured me...Hong Kong must have a high degree of autonomy and Hong Kong people would truly govern Hong Kong," the chief executive designate said.
Tung's popularity ratings have soared since he was picked by the Beijing-controlled Selection Commitee as the territory's Chief Executive.
A poll, conducted by the University of Hong Kong after Tung's selection on December 11, showed his popularity rating at a record high of 70.1 points.
But Tung, flanked at the airport by Zhang Junsheng, a vice director of Xinhua, China's de facto mission in Hong Kong, fought back at critics who say he would merely be Beijing's yes-man.
"I'm not the conquering hero, neither am I subdued" he said.
Tung hinted he might soon get legal endorsement for a China-backed provisional legislature which Beijing intends to put in place of the territory's current elected legislature.
"I've said many times before I believe the provisional legislature is legal...it would be nice if (China's) National Peoples' Congress could reaffirm this one more time," he said.
The legislature is to be formed this Saturday by the 400-member Selection Commitee that is meeting over the border in the city of Shenzhen in case of any legal challenge in the Hong Kong courts.
Tung also urged civil servants to stay on after the handover.
"Many senior Chinese leaders are concerned about civil servants staying on, to have a stable transition. I myself have said I hope they can stay on," he said.
