China rejected a British challenge to take it to the World Court and staged a vote on Saturday to set up a Hong Kong parliament that will oust elected lawmakers when Beijing recovers the territory next July.
Under heavy security and in a hall decked with red curtains and the Chinese communist red crest with five stars, an elite of 400 carefully chosen Hong Kong electors met in the Chinese city of Shenzhen to pick new legislators for the territory.
The members of the China-controlled Selection Committee cast ballots for the 60-seat legislature in big red envelopes.
They were choosing from 130 pro-Beijing candidates who had been screened by China's representatives in Hong Kong before the selection ballot.
Each elector could list up to 60 names from among the 130 hopefuls, who include 34 incumbent lawmakers.
The result, to be announced later on Saturday, is likely to be denounced by Britain and some of its allies as a travesty of democracy and a breach of handover agreements.
Britain is handing Hong Kong back to China at midnight next June 30 under a treaty that promises the territory of 6.3 million people can keep for 50 years its capitalist system.
Presiding over the gathering in Shenzhen, Chinese Foreign Minister Qian Qichen attempted to shoot down Britain's World Court threat and said London should wake up to reality.
"What is regrettable is that Britain has lacked the courage to face reality," Qian said in a speech before the voting.
"This election should have been held in Hong Kong, but because of Britain's refusal to cooperate we had no choice but to hold it here in Shenzhen."
On Friday, British Foreign Secretary Malcolm Rifkind challenged China to go to the International Court of Justice in The Hague to prove the legality of its so-called provisional legislature.
Hong Kong's colonial Governor Chris Patten also attacked the proposed legislature, calling it a "rubber stamp" and an "echo chamber".
China is creating the body in retaliation for democratic reforms introduced by Patten. The reforms enlarged the mass franchise when the present Legislative Council (Legco) was elected last year with a landslide for pro-democracy forces.
Saturday's vote was a turning point in Hong Kong's future and moved Legco a step closer to oblivion.
Events are moving apace, with less than 200 days to go before the change of flag. Ten days ago the Selection Committee chose Tung Chee-hwa, a 59-year-old shipping magnate with strong pro-Beijing loyalties, to succeed Patten next July 1.
The Hong Kong public has had no say in who should be their first Chinese leader and lawmakers after the British withdrawal. Nor have they had a say in the removal of their elected legislators.
A survey this week showed only a third of Hong Kong people backed the provisional legislature and only a quarter trusted China.
The creation of the interim lawmaking body in Shenzhen was conducted amid tight security.
Trucks towed away suspicious cars hours before the meeting began and guards with binoculars were posted atop the building across the street from the voting hall.
Some of more than 100 journalists, many of whom arrived on Friday, were detained for up to an hour while their travel documents were verified by Chinese border guards.
