Hong Kong's colonial Governor Chris Patten on Monday refused a request by future leader Tung Chee-hwa to support the interim legislature China will install in the territory when the British depart next year.
Shipping magnate Tung, emerging from his first meeting with Patten since being chosen on December 11 by a China-controlled committee to head Hong Kong from next July 1, told reporters that Patten flatly refused to provide any help to the new legislature in the run-up to the transfer of sovereignty to China.
"I brought up the work of the provisional legislature. I hope Mr Patten and the Hong Kong government can give help," Tung told reporters outside Government House, Patten's residence.
"But Mr Patten's position was very clear. I didn't successfully convince him," Tung said.
Both men emerged from a 1-1/2 hour meeting to exchange hearty handshakes and make brief speeches to the press, but mentioned little else of what transpired behind closed doors.
Describing the discussion as "long and constructive", both said they agreed to meet in the future when the need arose.
Patten, looking serious next to Tung, managed the occasional smile for photographers but turned to lead Tung into a waiting car immediately after his successor completed his short speech.
Neither of them took questions.
Monday's meeting was conducted under a cloud of strained Sino-British relations after China snubbed British objections and went ahead last Saturday with naming the provisional legislature that will replace the current elected Legislative Council (Legco) when Hong Kong returns to Chinese control 190 days from now.
The interim assembly was designed by China to reverse electoral reforms that Patten introduced unilaterally in recent years.
The move came under an international spotlight after British Foreign Minister Malcolm Rifkind on Friday challenged China to let the World Court rule on the legality of the new assembly.
Patten also lashed out at the new lawmaking body on Saturday, calling its appointment by a 400-member Selection Committee "a bizarre farce" and a "stomach-churning" process.
"What it shows about China is that, here it is taking over responsibility for a First World economy but they're trying to foist on us political institutions which a Third World country would reject," Patten had said.
"Here we are having foisted on us institutions which, frankly, you wouldn't try to run a tennis club with," he said.
China, however, has warned Britain against creating problems and to keep out of Hong Kong's affairs after the handover.
"After 1997, Hong Kong will be an internal affair of China. No foreign countries can interfere with China's internal affair," China's envoy in Hong Kong, Zhou Nan, told reporters.
"Whether Britain wants to accept my advice is up to it. But if it wants to create more new trouble, I don't think it will be out of the ordinary," he said on Monday at a public function.
The controversial new body is dominated by pro-Beijing figures, including 33 incumbent lawmakers and many politicians who lost to pro-democracy candidates in the 1995 Legco election.
The Democratic Party, the biggest single winner in last year's election with 19 of the 60 Legco seats, boycotted the creation of the provisional body, branding it undemocratic.
The Provisional Legislative Council, as it will be known, is to sit from July 1 until a new legislature can be created via elections.
