Hong Kong's future leader Tung Chee-hwa said on Monday the Beijing-approved body set up to replace the existing elected legislature in mid-1997 would soon hold its first sitting -- not in Hong Kong, but in China.
Tung was speaking after his first informal meeting with the post-colonial deputies who will take up lawmaking in Hong Kong after Britain hands back the territory at midnight next June 30.
The new chamber will soon hold its first official session most likely across the border in the southern Chinese city of Shenzhen, Tung told reporters.
"The provisional legislature must meet for the first time. It'll probably be in Shenzhen. It would be very soon," he said.
"We also discussed very unofficially the tasks ahead for the provisional legislature," Tung said.
The 60-member chamber was selected this month by a 400-strong selection committee comprised of Hong Kong people vetted by China.
The same panel earlier chose Tung to run the territory after colonial Governor Chris Patten departs in 183 days' time.
The provisional legislature is stiffly opposed by Hong Kong's Democratic Party, which emerged from 1995 elections for the present Legislative Council with the most votes of any party but will lose its seats next July 1.
The party calls the provisional body a travesty of democracy that will be illegal if it functions before the change of flag. Their threats of legal action have forced the body to meet in China.
The colonial government has agreed to cooperate with Tung on issues regarding the transfer of sovereignty but not with the provisional legislature.
On Monday Tung who has promised to respect the neutrality of Hong Kong's 180,000 civil servants, urged them to face the reality of the provisional legislature.
"The political neutrality of the civil service is very important, we must respect that. But after 1997, the provisional legislature will work with the civil service. That's a reality."
Many in Hong Kong are worried that stable government and the rule of law will evaporate when communist-ruled China takes back the capitalist territory of 6.3 million people.
On Saturday Tung persuaded Hong Kong's top civil servant, Chief Secretary Anson Chan, to stay in her post after the handover. But he has yet to decide the fate of other top officials.
In one of the first signs of cracks in the top echelon of officials, chief graft-buster Michael Leung, head of the Independent Commission Against Corruption, last week announced he would not serve beyond the handover.
Tung, who met Leung on Monday, said he failed to persuade Leung to change his mind. "It is a real pity. I wish he would stay...but he explained that it was for personal reasons he was leaving," he said.
