The future leader of Hong Kong said on Thursday he would discuss the legality and funding of the territory's controversial post-colonial assembly with China's legislators during his visit to Beijing this weekend.
"I will discuss with the National People's Congress (NPC) the legal status of the provisional legislature, and also find out more on the arrangements for its funding," Tung Chee-hwa told reporters after a public function.
The former shipping boss did not say whether he would ask the Chinese parliament to pass a law to endorse the existence of the provisional legislature, which was formed on December 21 in China's southern city of Shenzhen.
Tung had previously said he may ask the NPC to enact such legislation if the need arose.
Britain and the pro-democracy movement in Hong Kong say China's installation of the provisional legislature is illegal under the 1984 United Nations-registered Joint Declaration, which sets out the framework for the colony's returns to China.
China, upset by Hong Kong Governor Chris Patten's electoral reforms in the twilight of British rule, set up the legislature to reverse these reforms when it resumes sovereignty of the colony at midnight on June 30.
The interim chamber was chosen by a 400-strong Selection Committee, hand-picked by Beijing. The committee also selected Tung to succeed Patten.
Tung has said the provisional legislature would soon hold its first meeting. However it will meet in China, not Hong Kong, in order to avoid a legal challenge by the colony's Democratic Party. The territory's biggest pro-democracy group says it is constitutionally illegal to have two legislatures operating at the same time.
Tung said he would try to persuade the Democrats to accept the provisional body during a meeting with them next Thursday. "The provisional legislature has the right to exist. I hope that everyone ... can accept it," he said.
The chief executive-designate also said he would hold talks with Chinese officials during his two-day visit to the Chinese capital, but would not be more specific.
Tung visited Beijing on December 17 for the first time after his selection as Chief Executive and was received by President Jiang Zemin, Premier Li Peng and Foreign Minister Qian Qichen.
