Hong Kong's future leader Tung Chee-hwa is making plans to travel to major Western countries in a bid to raise the profile of the territory and clear the air over important issues related to its sovereignty transfer.
The roadshow, still in the works and its timing dependent on Tung's workload, could materialise before July 1, when the British colony of more than 150 years reverts to Chinese rule, his spokeswoman told Reuters on Sunday.
"Mr Tung's trip is to give a real picture of Hong Kong. He feels some countries do not really understand the real situation in Hong Kong," spokeswoman Elin Wong said by telephone.
"It would be this year. If it is possible, before (July 1) but it depends on his workload," Wong said, adding it would probably include the United States and some European countries.
The trip, which would be Tung's first outside China since being selected in December under close Beijing supervision as the territory's first post-handover chief, would focus on a wide range of issues related to Hong Kong's handover.
"He will not just talk on any particular issue, but a range, on all aspects that are important to Hong Kong," Wong said.
Tung, however, is expected to focus on what he has deemed to be misunderstandings in the West over an interim lawmaking chamber which China has vowed to install in place of Hong Kong's elected legislature upon the handover.
The 60-member provisional legislature was formed in December by a pro-China panel of 400, the same body which selected Tung as Hong Kong's first Chief Executive from July 1.
Hong Kong's British-run government has refused to cooperate with the body and the territory's pro-democracy camp, particularly the popular Democratic Party, also opposes it.
At a public function on Saturday, Tung said Western countries, particularly the U.S., has not properly understood the provisional legislature and other important issues related to Hong Kong's handover.
"Mr Tung said he would try his utmost to promote Hong Kong before July 1, and he hopes to clear all the misunderstandings now held by Western countries," the China-funded Wen Hui Pao newspaper reported on Sunday.
In his fiercest attack to date on critics of the provisional legislature, Tung told them last week to stop criticising the future lawmaking chamber when talking to Western leaders, adding their actions were a disservice to Hong Kong.
