Long before Hong Kong's handover to China, celebrity painter Liu Yu Yi, whose portrait subjects include Beijing's leaders, is already benefiting from the return of Britain's last Asian outpost to the Chinese fold.
Spanning an entire wall in his home in Hong Kong's posh Mid-levels district is an almost finished oil painting depicting over 200 famous personalities at a feast celebrating the handover at midnight on June 30.
Central on the canvas is China's paramount leader Deng Xiaoping, the man hailed as the architect of the "one country, two systems" formula under which Hong Kong would be treated after the handover.
Raising a toast, Deng is flanked by President Jiang Zemin, Premier Li Peng and Tung Chee-hwa, the man who will run Hong Kong after Britain hands back its colony of more than 150 years.
"I am using art to capture this momentous event that is watched by all nations of the world," Liu, reclining on a sofa, told Reuters during an interview.
THE CHINA BREAKTHROUGH
Trained at the Central Academy of Fine Arts in Beijing, Liu shot to fame in 1993 when he sold "Liang Xiao" (Festive Evening) -- a flashback to a historic gathering of China's leaders in 1950 -- for HK$8.36 million (US$1.08 million).
It was the highest price paid for a contemporary Chinese work of art, and he has been hitting jackpots ever since.
He sold "Song of the Goddess Nu Wa" for HK$8.88 million in 1994 and "Gathering of Immortals" for HK$10.8 million in 1995.
THE HONGKONG CONNECTION
Whether because of his talent, access to high places or being in the right place at the right time, Liu has penetrated the ranks of the rich and influential since coming to Hong Kong in 1991.
Liu, whose entire family lived on his monthly wage of 40 yuan (US$4.80) in the 1970s, has done portraits of Hong Kong business titans such as Li Ka-shing, Stanley Ho, Simon Li, Gordon Wu and Run Run Shaw.
Mindful of the handover five months away, Hong Kong's rich and pragmatic have been embracing their mainland peers, be they politicians, businessmen or artists, and are stocking up their homes with Chinese art and antiques.
But the well-connected Liu, who drew Tung into his work on the handover more than five months before the tycoon was even selected as Hong Kong's first colonial leader, betrayed little when asked what sparked the insight.
"I just thought he was the likeliest candidate," he chuckled before adding that the dozen empty headslots would be drawn in after Tung announces his team-designate.
SUCCESS DIDN'T COME EASY
Liu's real break came in 1988 when "Festive Evening" was exibited in the Memorial Hall of the late Chinese leader Mao Zedong.
It prompted a request from Beijing for Liu to create another work. The resulting "Ren Min Wan Sui" or "Long Live The People" has adorned Beijing's Tiananmen Rostrum since 1990.
But all this did not come easy for the artist who was sent off to toil in a rural commune during the ultra-leftist years of the Mao-inspired Cultural Revolution (1966-1976).
"I suffered tremendous shock, persecution. They said I was a 'black' artist, that I did not conform politically," Liu said.
"Seven years. Seven years I lost time to practise my art. I only came back in 1977, then I painted again," he said.
CULTURAL REVOLUTION HARDSHIPS PROVIDED INSPIRATION
Ironically, it was those years of persecution and aimless toil that inspired "Liang Xiao", his first work after the end of the revolution, and a piece which would take him till 1984.
"After the Cultural Revolution, I wanted to say many things which had been locked in my heart. I saw all the chaos and fighting. I was very depressed and I suffered a lot," Liu said.
"I knew this can never be repeated. I wished that it would be 'liang xiao' every night. That every night would be wonderful and whole for the country. That was what I wanted to say."
Things have looked up since for Liu, whose works echo the leanings of socialist realism, a creed that was hammered into intellectuals and artists during the late 1950s.
Snubbing the formulaic mountains, valleys, bamboo trees and the miniature people of lofty Chinese landscape art, Liu said: "These works have lasted for too long in China. From the Song Dynasty onwards, too many, too many.
"Under my hand, my pursuit is different...that of entry into the world, not retreat. To immerse into this world," he said.
FELLOW ARTISTS AND CRITICS LESS KIND
While Liu's talent as a portrait painter is admired, the material success that his brushes have brought more than just raised eyebrows from those in his trade.
Gallery owner Karl McLean, who helped sell "Song of the Goddess Nu Wa", said: "He's a very good portrait painter, and has very good connections in Beijing...but the artists hate him, they think he is just political and very commercial.
"I think he's a very clever guy, he's a very smart guy. He knows how to make money and he knows how to handle the rich. He knows how to get them to pay up big time," McLean told Reuters. (US$1 = HK$7.73)
