British Foreign Secretary Malcolm Rifkind on Saturday flies earlier than expected to Hong Kong where he can expect a tough reception on what may be his last visit before it is handed back to China in July.
Legislators in the territory are gearing up to grill Rifkind on Sunday on the fate of Hong Kong's freedoms and human rights laws after the British colony of more than 150 years reverts to Chinese rule at midnight on June 30.
Rifkind, who was in Singapore this week for a meeting of Asia-Europe meeting, is arriving in Britain's last major Asian outpost on a shortened visit before leaving for London for a key parliamentary vote.
A spokesman for the British Foreign Office mission in Hong Kong said Rifkind's timetable in the colony had been moved forward and he was expected to leave on Monday morning.
On Sunday, Rifkind was expected to meet Hong Kong's future leader, Tung Chee-hwa, Governor Chris Patten's team of executive councillors, legislators and other senior officials.
If he had kept to his orginal schedule, Rifkind would have missed an important parliamentary vote on Monday called by the opposition Labour Party over Agriculture Minister Douglas Hogg's handling of the "mad cow" disease.
But Rifkind's visit to Hong Kong, although short, will be far from easy.
Just 136 days before the handover, Hong Kong is beset with worries over China's plans to replace its elected chamber on July 1 with a provisional legislature, which was formed last December under close Chinese supervision.
The freewheeling territory of 6.3 million people is also concerned about threats to cut back its civil liberties.
"We want Rifkind to clarify on whether there would be two legislatures operating before July 1," said Yeung Sum, deputy head of the Democratic Party, Hong Kong's largest.
"I think he should make a strong statement on it, because...it is the British and Hong Kong government running the place before July 1. If there are two legislatures running at the same time...it will be very confusing," Yeung said.
The Democratic Party has threatened to sue the provisional chamber should it try to enact laws or operate on Hong Kong soil before July 1.
Britain has also said the move is illegal under a 1984 Sino-British handover treaty on Hong Kong and has challenged China to let the world court rule on the legality of the body.
A pro-China Hong Kong newspaper on Saturday slammed the idea as ridiculous.
"Rifkind recommends letting the world court arbitrate on the provisional legislature. That is ridiculous and laughable," the Wen Hui Pao newspaper said.
It said whatever happened in Hong Kong after July 1 was a matter entirely for China to handle.
