Britain's Home Office has warned ethnic minority residents in Hong Kong that they will not get British passports when the colony is handed over to China if they relinquished other passports in order to qualify.
In a statement made available late on Friday, the British government said applicants should be solely British before February 4, when the plan to grant full passports to 8,000 ethnic minority Hong Kong residents was announced.
"This means that anyone voluntarily renouncing another nationality on or after that date will not qualify," it said.
Hong Kong's ethnic minorities had previously faced the threat of becoming stateless when China resumes sovereignty over the British colony of over 150 years at midnight on June 30.
While they will have residency rights in Hong Kong after the handover, it was unclear whether they would be entitled passports of the future Hong Kong Special Administrative Region.
But the condition set down by Britain is widely seen as an attempt to plug a loophole after local newspapers reported some ethnic minority residents were ditching their other passports in the hope of qualifying for full British ones.
A prominent business leader in Hong Kong's Indian community on Saturday slammed the February 4 cut-off.
"This is not the right attitude of the British government. They shouldn't give conditions to it. They should give full passports without any clauses," Nari Dadlani told Reuters by telephone.
Dadlani, a naturalised Hong Kong resident of 38 years who holds no other passport, said he would stay on in Hong Kong even if he was to be granted full British citizenship.
"What we need is only an insurance, when emergencies arise. We are not going to take the first flight to London with this passport...we are much more happy here in Hong Kong," he said.
"And even when it comes to that, the Indian community is going to take a lot of capital to the U.K. We are not going to ask for social security and such things," Dadlani said.
In its statement, the British Home Office said necessary legislation would first need to be enacted before those concerned, mostly Indians and Pakistanis, could apply to become British citizens.
Applicants should be ordinarily resident in Hong Kong and they, including spouses and children, must qualify in their own right, it said
Successful applicants would be granted full British citizenship from July 1, the statement said.
