British Foreign Secretary Malcolm Rifkind met future Hong Kong leader Tung Chee-hwa on Sunday for the first time since Tung was chosen but failed to narrow the gulf between the territory's outgoing and incoming governments.
Tung, a shipping magnate anointed by Beijing in December, told reporters after the talks that London had not budged in its refusal to aid a provisional legislature that China would install when the British leave later this year.
"On the work of the provisional legislature, I've urged the Hong Kong government to give assistance and help," Tung said.
"Britain's position has always been clear, but I hope they will reconsider."
Britain argues that the formation of the provisional legislature, set up by a China-appointed panel to replace the elected chamber, is illegal under the terms of the 1984 Sino-British handover treaty on Hong Kong.
Hong Kong reverts to China at midnight on June 30.
Rifkind's brief visit, perhaps his last to Hong Kong before the flag comes down on more than 150 years of British colonial rule of the territory, was cut short to let him return early to London for a key vote in Parliament on the "mad cow" crisis.
A loss could trigger a vote of no confidence in the ruling Conservative Party, which is lagging in the polls. But Hong Kong's South China Morning Post, miffed that Rifkind was putting domestic concerns ahead of Hong Kong's problems, headlined its Sunday editorial: "When mad cows matter more than Hong Kong".
Britain is to hold a general election before May 22, and it is not known who will be at the helm at the time of the handover. But whoever holds the foreign secretary's portfolio in the final days of the countdown can be assured of a bumpy ride.
With 135 days to go until the transition, Hong Kong is awash with conflicting emotions that have pitted the pro-Beijing and pro-democracy camps against each other and sparked acrimonious exchanges.
Tung last week hit out at the Democracy Party, accusing it of blackening Hong Kong's name overseas by spreading doomsday predictions about the loss of freedoms.
He argued that Hong Kong's economy was buoyant, its people upbeat, and described China's plans as mere technicalities.
His comments have hit a raw nerve with the vocal pro-democracy movement in Hong Kong, which argues that a tide of opinion has been rising against what they describe as Tung's increasingly authoritarian policy statements.
"This is just the beginning. The way things are going, Tung Chee-hwa and his government-in-waiting will be running out of popularity long before July 1," pro-democracy lawmaker Margaret Ng wrote in a newspaper column on Friday.
"Mr Tung's ship of state is charting a decidedly retrogressive course," she wrote. "Confidence may yet be restored provided this paranoia about democracy is put aside."
Another symbol of Hong Kong's British heritage passed into the history books during Rifkind's visit.
The 115-year-old Royal Observatory, given its "royal" prefix by King George V in 1912, dropped the royal coat of arms from its emblem. Its new logo has spiralling cloudbanks symbolising typhoons, the fierce storms that periodically pound Hong Kong.
