British Foreign Secretary Malcolm Rifkind met future Hong Kong leader Tung Chee-hwa on Sunday for the first time since Tung was chosen but failed to narrow the gulf between the outgoing and incoming governments.
Tung told reporters after the talks that London had refused to budge from its objections to Chinas plans to install an interim appointed legislature and dilute Hong Kongs civil liberties laws, policies Tung endorses and Hong Kongs pro-democracy lobby vociferously opposes.
Rifkind later lashed out at sceptics who argued Britain was impotent against Chinas plans for Hong Kong after the handover at midnight on June 30, a date now just 19 weeks away.
"We will not only maintain maximum pressure until June 30. Through our involvement (in Hong Kong), we will be able to continue to monitor and make public our opinion on the compliance by the Chinese authorities with the Joint Declaration," he told a news conference.
The 1984 Sino-British Joint Declaration binds Britain to restoring Hong Kong to China in mid-1997 and China to maintaining Hong Kongs freedoms and capitalist way of life intact for 50 years.
Tung said he still harboured hopes the British would relent and cooperate with Chinas provisional legislature which will replace an elected chamber returned under the auspices of recent democratic reforms spearheaded by the colonial governor, Chris Patten.
"Britains position has always been clear, but I hope they will reconsider," said Tung, a billionaire shipping magnate who was anointed by Beijing in December.
Britain argues that the formation of the provisional legislature, which reverses the Patten reforms, is illegal under the terms of the Joint Declaration.
Rifkinds brief visit, perhaps his last to Hong Kong before the flag comes down on more than 150 years of British colonial rule, was cut short to let him return early to London for a key vote in the British parliament on the "mad cow" crisis.
A loss could trigger a vote of no confidence in the ruling Conservative Party, which is lagging in public opinion polls. A British general election must be held no later than May 22.
Hong Kongs South China Morning Post newspaper, miffed that Rifkind was putting domestic concerns ahead of Hong Kongs problems, headlined its Sunday editorial: "When mad cows matter more than Hong Kong".
With 135 days to the handover, Hong Kong is awash with conflicting emotions which have pitted the pro-Beijing and pro-democracy camps against each other and sparked acrimonious exchanges and counter-accusations.
Tung last week hit out at the Democracy Party, accusing it of blackening Hong Kongs name overseas by spreading doomsday predictions about the loss of freedoms.
He argued that Hong Kongs economy was buoyant, its people upbeat, and he described Chinas plans as mere technicalities.
"This is just the beginning. The way things are going, Tung Chee-hwa and his government-in-waiting will be running out of popularity long before July 1," pro-democracy lawmaker Margaret Ng wrote in a newspaper column on Friday.
Rifkind said Tung would need to show his independence of mind if he wanted to keep the confidence of Hong Kong people.
"He (Tung) is very emphatic that he is not under any direction from the Chinese government that they have not sought to influence his views or to tell him how to behave," Rifkind said of Hong Kongs future leader.
"Wherever his views might differ from those of the Chinese authorities, if they do differ, it would be in his own interest to make that clear, so that his independence is well understood," he added.
