Hong Kong lined up on Thursday to pay its respects to China's dead leader Deng Xiaoping.
Colonial Governor Chris Patten was one of the first to be escorted inside the Xinhua news agency, Beijing's de facto mission in Hong Kong, to offer his condolences. Deng died late on Wednesday at the age of 92.
"I have written to director Zhou Nan, the head of the New China News Agency (Xinhua), expressing my condolences and of course if there is a condolence book opened I will want to sign that with the senior members of my administration," Patten told reporters before going in.
Asked if he would sent flowers, he replied: "I don't think that would be appropriate."
There has been little love lost between Government House and Xinhua during Patten's four-and-a-half-year tenure as the 28th and last British Governor of Hong Kong.
China denounced Patten as a political prostitute, a criminal for one thousand years and worse for spearheading democratic reforms in the twilight of British rule.
China plans to undo his reforms by dissolving Hong Kong's elected legislature and replacing it with an interim appointed chamber.
Patten was followed on Thursday by the man who will step into his shoes when the colony is handed over to China at the stroke of midnight on June 30, now just 131 days away.
Future leader Tung Chee-hwa, flanked by members of his inner cabinet, bowed three times to a large black and white photograph of Deng.
Hong Kong's politically powerful billionaires and new generation of pro-Beijing politicians turned up in force and were reverently ushered in.
An elderly couple, however, jumped the gun.
They turned up early in the morning, before Xinhua had managed to make arrangements for mourners for the man whose reforms transformed China from a weak, impoverished nation to an emerging economic powerhouse.
They were told to come back in the afternoon.
Five demonstrators staged a brief protest against Deng who they described as "the Butcher of Beijing" for his role in the brutal crushing of the student-led pro-democracy movement centred on Beijing's Tiananmen Square on June 4, 1989.
"One man has just died, but so many are mourning for him. Don't forget the number of people who died on June 4," they said.
