Chinese flags flew at half mast across Hong Kong, Thursday morning newspapers were delayed and pupils at "patriotic" pro-Beijing schools stood in silence after news that China's patriarch Deng Xiaoping had died.
"Deng Dead," screamed banner headlines in Hong Kong's Hong Kong's newspapers when they eventually appeared. All devoted acres of newsprint to the life and times of China's paramount leader, who had wanted to visit Hong Kong after it was reunited with China in July this year.
"Come later. Lots of papers are changing their main sections," a newspaper hawker told early commuters en route to Hong Kong's Central business district.
Deprived of reading matter many plugged in their headphones and switched between different Hong Kong radio stations.
Some expressed grief but many inhabitants of the British colony of Hong Kong took Deng's demise in their stride.
"I couldn't sleep well the whole night. He was a great leader of our nation. He improved China," said Ko Chiu, 80, who was among a group of elderly practioners of Tai Chi, or Chinese shadow boxing.
But another elderly resident Auyeung Pak, 85, paused from his slow jog in a Hong Kong park to shrug off Deng's death.
"It's normal for a man of that old age. I'm not too sad."
Chinese flags at China's de facto mission in Hong Kong, the Xinhua News Agency, flew at half-mast.
Pupils at the Piu Kiu Middle School, which follows a mainland Chinese curriculum, observed a minute's silence.
Some analysts have predicted Deng's death will create uncertainty in Hong Kong, threatening stability during its delicate transition to Chinese rule at midnight on June 30, 1997, a date now 131 days away.
But there was scant sign of much emotion in the business district.
"It's business as usual," said an employee of the state-owned bank of China as he hurried into the bank's futuristic highrise headquarters.
He's lucky to have lived for so long," said a 55-year-old women, pausing briefly in her tai chi regime.
A camera-toting Taiwanese tourist, accompanied by her two young daughters, said she did not care.
"I don't feel anything. I heard it early this morning."
