Newspapers in Hong Kong were dominated on Friday by reaction to the death of Deng Xiaoping, with many eulogising his reformist policies that made China, Hong Kong's future sovereign, rich and strong.
"Nobody in the course of this century raised the material standards of living of more people than Deng Xiaoping," the widely-circulated South China Morning Post said.
"That, in itself, would ensure Deng his place among the leading figures of the century," it said in its editorial.
Little effort was spared as newspapers splashed full-colour photographs of mourners in Hong Kong and China's southern border city of Shenzhen in Guangdong province.
While some papers noted Deng's role behind the military crackdown against 1989 Tiananmen Square democracy protests, the issue was not emphasised.
The military suppression had outraged Hong Kong at the time and shook confidence in the territory, which reverts to Chinese sovereignty at midnight on June 30.
"He deserves to be treated as one of China's greatest leaders," the Hongkong Standard said in a front-page editorial.
Deng, who died late on Wednesday at the age of 92 of complications from Parkinson's disease and a lung infection, was widely credited with transforming China from an improverished Stalinist state into an emerging economic powerhouse.
China's economic flowering helped drive Hong Kong, as factories owned by the territory's businessmen mushroomed in neighbouring Guangdong province and Chinese products poured through Hong Kong's port.
Deng also engineered the "one country, two systems" formula paving the way for the return of the British colony to China.
"Learn from Xiaoping's merits, actualise the one country, two systems," the independent Chinese-language Ming Pao said. "This is the best way to fulfil his dream...to ensure his vision lasts forever."
Some papers ran polls, awarding high marks for Deng's achievements. A Ming Pao survey of over 1,900 respondents found Deng scoring 6.4 out of nine for his achievements, while 60 percent thought his death would not affect Hong Kong.
Tin Tin Daily News said a poll of 90 people it conducted showed 85 percent were confident that the one-country, two-systems formula would be implemented.
Normally trim Beijing-backed newspapers Wen Wei Pao and Ta Kung Pao boasted separate takeouts filled with condolence advertisements from companies and individuals.
Perhaps the only discordant note in Hong Kong's eloquent song of praise was an off-colour quarter-page photograph on the front page of the Chinese-language Apple Daily, which it claimed to be Deng's last picture taken while alive in hospital in December.
Photographed secretly through a crack in the door, it showed a wan Deng, with eyes red-rimmed and puffy, staring blankly into space.
