China's state refiner Sinopec is pushing through a series of measures to alleviate diesel shortages that have sparked a bizarre rise in prices in the country since late 1996, Chinese oil sources said this week.
After two successive rises in official diesel prices in the fourth quarter of 1996, Sinopec's Beijing headquarters is now urging its almost 40 refineries to increase the cut of diesel from every barrel of crude they refine.
"Gas oil (diesel) has been in short supply in the country as a whole since the fourth quarter of last year," a well-placed Sinopec source said by telephone from Beijing.
"As for Sinopec, we are trying to regulate the production of gas oil as against gasoline to meet market demand," he said.
The current gasoline/diesel production ratio stands at 1:1.3 for almost all of China's refineries. But Sinopec in Beijing is pushing for a more suitable ratio of 1:1.4, the source said, adding that the change would take some months to materialise.
Diesel import quotas, which were not fully utilised in 1996 due to high international prices, might also have exacerbated the shortage in the supply chain, and China might be forced to import more this year, the Sinopec source said.
He declined to estimate the amount of diesel likely to be imported this year.
The plan to raise domestic diesel output comes after two officially sanctioned price rises in late 1996 to encourage refiners to produce more diesel, Chinese oil sources said.
Domestic diesel prices had been frozen at 1,900 yuan per tonne since May 1994, when Beijing imposed strict price ceilings to crack down on profiteering. Prices were raised to 1,990 yuan per tonne in October 1996 and 2,190 yuan per tonne in December.
While Beijing, fearful of inflation, keeps a watch on prices, Chinese oil sources admit there is little central authorities can do to prevent flagrant price spikes in far-flung provinces hit by shortages.
"In situations of shortage, provinces can raise prices, it is difficult for Beijing to control," the Sinopec source said.
However, some Chinese sources said earlier this week that shortages might only be isolated to some inland provinces as some coastal regions were still enjoying high inventories.
"Storage levels are healthy in some areas," said a Singapore-based trader with Chinese state oil trader Sinochem.
Storage terminals at some coastal regions were at full capacity after importers sucked in a massive 1.9 million tonnes that started arriving from mid-January, a Sinopec source in Singapore said.
"Central authorities were afraid there wouldn't be enough for spring and even refiners were urged to crank up their gas oil production," he said.
Authorities might have frozen import quotas for now -- until the bottleneck clears -- but it was likely to be short term because China was short of diesel for this year, he added.
A Chinese oil trader from the southern Maoming refinery, China's second largest, said diesel prices had hit as high as 5,000 yuan per tonne in some provinces suffering shortages.
"Prices were between 4,000 and even 5,000 yuan in December in places like Hunan and Sichuan," the trader said by telephone earlier this week. Refineries raised prices because their net costs had increased.
Chinese refiners have had sharply reduced profit margins since Beijing raised domestic crude prices by about 110 yuan in January 1996 to between 864 and 794 yuan a tonne on 80 percent of its crude sold within the country.
Fearful of an inflationary backlash, Beijing had, until October, kept prices of all oil products unchanged. Sinopec, which made exceptional profits in 1995 and 1994, bore the brunt of the rise in crude prices.
"Refining margins last year, compared with the earlier two years, were very bad. A lot of our profit went to our upstream companies," the Sinopec source said.
-- Hong Kong Newsroom (852) 28436934
