Lehman Brothers and state-owned China International United Petroleum and Chemicals Co Ltd (Unipec) on Monday announced settlement of a 22-month foreign-exchange trading quarrel and resolved to get on with business.
The US$44 million dispute over currency and swap option trading had been broiling since November 1994.
The settlement means that only one of Lehman's three high-profile disputes with Chinese state-owned companies remains to be resolved.
A joint statement by Unipec and Lehman said only that their foreign exchange trading dispute had been resolved.
"Unipec plays a vital role in China's economy as the largest importer of crude oil...with this situation behind us, Lehman Brothers is keen to get on with developing our business in China," Lehman said.
Unipec returned the compliment, saying that it anticipated working with Lehman in the future.  
Lehman filed a US$44 million lawsuit in New York in November 1994 claiming that the Chinese trader had reneged on obligations over certain foreign exchange and swap transactions after incurring losses.
Unipec had hit back with a counterclaim saying Lehman had taken orders from certain Hong Kong firms with which Unipec was not affiliated
"Unipec and Lehman have come to a settlement agreement. Lehman has cancelled the lawsuit, and we have cancelled our counterclaim," said a senior Unipec manager by telephone.
The quarrel brought unwelcome attention to Unipec and illuminated the sometimes unorthodox ways in which Chinese companies deal with foreign counterparts.
Oil industry watchers said the case had hurt the reputation of the Chinese oil trader, which was set up only in January 1993, and it would be a while before it regained the confidence of its peers.
"Damage has already been done to Unipec, and it has been suffering especially in the U.S., with everyone asking for letters of credit when the case exploded...it's better for them to close the matter," said an oil trading manager with a major oil company in Singapore.  
Another oil industry observer agreed, saying "it takes a while for people to accept them back."
Still outstanding is Lehman's US$53 million suit against China's Minmetals International Non-Ferrous Metals Trading Co, which arose in late 1994 in similar circumstances.
Minmetals subsequently filed a US$128 million countersuit, including six counter claims of fraud, alleging Lehman knew the investments were unsuitable for it.
"We would love to reach a settlement (with Minmetals). We are now in negotiations and that's about it," a Lehman spokesman in Hong Kong said by telephone.
Lehman in April reached a settlement with the New York branch of oil trader Sinochem, parent of Unipec, of a US$20 million lawsuit concerning losses incurred on US$300 million of securities trades which the Chinese firm refused to recognise.
