European parliamentarians urged Hong Kong people on Tuesday to "speak up and not shut up" in the face of growing fears that China will roll back democratic freedoms when the territory reverts to China.
They also said they will recommend to the European Parliament to urge Britain to contest China's decision to replace the territory's elected legislature with an appointed interim chamber at the handover at midnight of June 30.
"Our message to Hong Kong is don't shut up, speak up," said Graham Watson, a member of the British Liberal Democratic Party, at a news conference during a two-day visit.
Citing a European maxim, Watson said, "What is required for evil to triumph is for good people to remain silent", adding that democracy was now the way of the world, while totalitarianism and dictatorship was evil.
Watson and three other members of the European Parliament (MEPs) met Hong Kong's future leader Tung Chee-hwa, prominent lawyers and members of Hong Kong's current elected legislature, and will meet colonial Governor Chris Patten.
Hong Kong, a British colony of over 150 years, reverts to China from July 1, and fears are mounting among its 6.4 million people that its democratic freedoms and rights, introduced by Britain in the final years of its rule, will be snuffed out.
Chief amongst Hong Kong's worries is a China-crafted provisional legislature which will replace the elected chamber, and Beijing's plan to amend or strike down a string of laws protecting civil liberties and democracy.
Tung, who replaces Patten on July 1, has backed the proposed changes, arguing that they were mere technicalities and necessary to preserve social order.
The MEPs, who criticised Britain for being too late in bringing democracy and civil rights to Hong Kong, also said London should contest the legality of the shadow legislature in the International Court of Justice (ICJ) in The Hague.
"We believe the United Kingdom would have a good case...for going to the United Nations, even the Security Council and asking for the matter to be referred to the ICJ," Watson said.
"We believe that the abolition of the elected Legislative Council is an illegal act, and we believe it should be challenged in international law," he said.
London has said its hands are tied on the matter as China has refused to refer the issue to the world court. The MEPs however thought the matter should be pursued.
"There is nothing to stop the United Kingdom taking it to the United Nations...we would like to see the panoply of legal instruments in due process in law be used, even if in the end the process is frustrated," Watson said.
A dozen activists staged a noisy protest at the office of future leader Tung on Tuesday morning, demanding an apology for his support of China's plans.
The group, a coalition of 27 grassroot organisations which called itself the Hong Kong People's United Front for the Defence of Human Rights, chanted slogans and called on Tung to relate the views of Hong Kong people to Chinese leaders.
"We strongly request the future chief executive to apologise to all Hong Kong people and to honestly reflect their views to the Chinese government and to do his duty by defending human rights, freedom and the rule of law," the group said in a letter later given to Tung's office employees.
