Hong Kong Governor Chris Patten told a meeting of central bankers on Friday that the territory's economic prosperity was due to its increasingly democratic government.
In remarks aimed as much at official audiences over the border in China as at the central bankers attending the financial conference he was addressing, Patten said Hong Kong people had developed the institutions and values of a civil society.
"The government has responded (positively) to that process and to the changes in aspirations which have accompanied it, by welcoming ever wider public participation in the process of government," he told the conference, organised by the Hong Kong Monetary Authority and the International Monetary Fund (IMF).
He drew attention to China's commitment, in the Sino-British accords covering the British colony's return to China this July 1, to allow the development of democracy in the territory.
Hong Kong, a territory of 6.4 million people on the south China coast, reverts to China after more than 150 years as a British colonial possession, under a 1984 Sino-British treaty.
The treaty, the Joint Declaration, guarantees the territory will have a high degree of autonomy and keep its freewheeling capitalism for a further 50 years after the handover.
The territory is one of the world's economic marvels. It is the eighth largest trading economy and sits on one of the world's biggest pots of foreign reserves -- US$66 billion.
However, China has launched moves over the past year to scrap Hong Kong's elected legislature, reverse Patten's reforms that widened the democratic franchise and roll back laws on civil liberties, when Beijing resumes sovereignty.
Beijing's moves have stirred outrage among the territory's pro-democracy groups and opposition from Britain and the United States, undermining a smooth transition.
"Democracy, as promised and pledged in the Joint Declaration and in the Basic Law, has taken root and started to flourish here. This has strongly underpinned Hong Kong's economic prosperity and Hong Kong's social stability," Patten said.
He said Hong Kong's stability in the next century would need what he called "responsive government". Economic and social change would put huge strains on society, Patten said.
"Those pressures demand sophisticated and responsive institutions of public administration to channel them productively into communal progress rather than letting them build up to the detriment of political and economic stability.
"Hong Kong has responded creatively to the pressures that it's faced, preparing itself for all the challenges which, like all the developing economies of Asia, it will face in the coming century. That's not a process which should or could be stopped."
