Hong Kong's future leader Tung Chee-hwa met a political opponent on Monday he has accused of badmouthing Hong Kong abroad in the run-up to Chinese rule, holding talks that appeared to strike a conciliatory note.
However, Tung and Democratic Party leader Martin Lee, a fierce critic of China, remained poles apart on key issues at the heart of the democratic camp's worries about Hong Kong's return to Chinese rule at midnight on June 30.
In a meeting he described as "cooperative" and "good", the second since the shipping magnate was selected in December as Hong Kong's future leader, Lee said his party allowed Tung to clarify his position if he believed he had been misinterpreted.
"If he thinks we have misunderstood him, he can tell us, so we can clear any misunderstanding," Lee told reporters.
Lee said he gave Tung a "position paper" highlighting issues Lee would be discussing with political and business leaders in an upcoming trip to the United States, Canada and Europe.
The paper stated what the Democrats saw as Tung's stance on key issues about Hong Kong's handover, giving the future leader a chance to clear up any misunderstandings over his position.
Lee, who has made many trips overseas to lobby against the provisional legislature and China's plans to roll back on rights and civil liberties at the handover, has been attacked by Tung in recent weeks for criticising Hong Kong abroad.
But the long-time champion of democracy in the territory, who will receive the National Endowment for Democracy's 1997 Democracy Award on Washington's Capitol Hill on April 9, said he would continue to go on his overseas lobbying trips.
He also dismissed suggestions from the media that the party would censor itself in the future.
"No, we will still speak (overseas), but if Mr Tung says he has been misunderstood, we will consider his views, we will definitely not be censoring ourselves," Lee said.
The party also stood firm against the provisional legislature.
"I told Mr Tung so long as this provisional legislature were to have its first, second, third readings on any bill before July 1, we will have no option but take it to court," he said.
With the handover just 106 days away, Hong Kong is awash with concerns over the impending end of its elected legislature and Beijing's plans to repeal or amend a string of laws protecting human rights and civil liberties.
