China is keen to see a smooth resumption of sovereignty over Hong Kong because it will pave the way eventually for reunification with Taiwan, an expert on Chinese security policy said on Thursday.
Jonathan Pollack, a senior advisor on international policy at the Rand think-tank in the United States, also said he expected the People's Liberation Army (PLA) to gain more clout as the country's new leader Jiang Zemin needed its support.
"After the Hong Kong transition, we're going to see (China) putting some pressure on Taiwan to accelerate some kind of discussions, if not an overt negotiation," said Pollack, a specialist on Chinese political and security affairs.
"The Chinese do believe that it will serve as an example if they are able to effect this transition in an uneventful fashion. It will serve as an example that will help...their seeking more cooperation from Taiwan in the future," he told reporters after presenting a seminar in Hong Kong.
Hong Kong, a British colony of more than 150 years, reverts to China at midnight on June 30. Under Sino-British handover treaties, the territory of 6.4 million people is guaranteed autonomy for 50 years, except in foreign affairs and defence.
The imminent return of Hong Kong to China's fold, in just 103 days, under a "one country, two systems" policy allowing it a high degree of autonomy, is held up by Beijing as a model for Taiwan's eventual reunification with China.
Beijing regards Taiwan as a renegade province since a civil war split them in 1949 and has warned the Nationalist-ruled island against any aspirations for formal state independence.
Pollack also said the death of China's leader Deng Xiaoping in February would result in a higher profile for the PLA, mainly because the country's new leader needed its political backing.
"It will give the PLA more resources...enhanced budgetary clout, only because Jiang Zemin's own position depends to a significant extent on the military support he has," he said.
"Deng was in a position to say no to different people in the PLA. I don't think Jiang is quite in the same position."
Pollack said that how the PLA would use its new leverage remained to be seen, but he thought it was unlikely to flex its muscles in an "assertive or aggressive fashion."
