Thousands of Hong Kong people took to the streets under rain-filled skies on Sunday to celebrate the 100-day countdown to the resumption of Chinese rule over the British colony at midnight on June 30.
The bad weather failed to dampen an outburst of nationalistic pride as dragons, lions and unicorns -- Chinese symbols of luck and joy -- pranced to the deafening clash of cymbals and drums.
More than 7,000 people of all ages from more than 100 pro-Beijing community organisations took part in the parade which wound through busy streets on Hong Kong island.
When Hong Kong, a British colony for more than 150 years, returns to China, it will become a Special Administrative Region (SAR) governed by its own Chief Executive and promised considerable autonomy in running its affairs.
"This is a grand and great occasion. In just 100 days, we will return to the Chinese motherland," said chief organiser Raymond Wu at the start of the rally which gathered in Victoria Park -- named after the British queen who reigned when Britain seized Hong Kong from a weak China in the 19th century.
"We welcome the washing away of over a century of humiliation and shame," Wu said to a burst of applause.
The present Queen's head is disappearing from the territory's coins and stamps. Victoria Park will be renamed Central Park after the handover.
Few of the merry-makers as much as glanced at the massive bronze statute of Victoria in the park as they left for a march through the streets.
Sporting red and white baseball caps and waving little red and gold flags of China interspersed with the red and white flags of the new Hong Kong SAR, the crowds marched through busy streets, laughing and urging bystanders to join in. Few did.
Not everyone was as joyful as those in the parade.
A handful of demonstrators, their mouths taped shut, took up position around the base of Victoria's statue and held up placards condemning China's military crackdown on student-led demonstrators around Beijing's Tiananmen Square in June, 1989.
"People are bleeding, butchers are celebrating, shame on you," the black and white placards read.
But they failed to get much attention.
"They are mad. This is a glorious occasion. The past has been a shame for Hong Kong. I cannot wait for the handover," a bystander, Wu, 65, told Reuters.
