The federal government's bid to pry open the phone business has hit a snag that could postpone the onset of full-blown competition in the local and long-distance markets and delay cheaper phone service.
The snag came when a federal appeals court Tuesday suspended, or stayed, key parts of a Federal Communications Commission rule opening local phone monopolies to competition from long-distance carriers, cable TV operators and others.
Experts said the action could postpone competition in the $100 billion local phone market now controlled by the regional Baby Bell phone companies, until the case makes its way through the courts in coming months. A final decision could easily take a year or more.
"We're in for a very messy 1997, and the dust won't settle until fairly deep into 1997," said Henry Geller, a former top telecommunications official in the Commerce Department.
That, in turn, could delay the Baby Bells' entrance into the $70 billion long-distance market. The telecommunications law enacted in February lets the Bells offer long-distance only after they have opened their own markets to new rivals.
Even before the appeals court acted, government officials suggested a prolonged delay of the FCC's rules would make it tougher for regulators to allow the Bells to enter the long-distance business.
The FCC -- along with the Justice Department and state regulators -- has the final say over whether the Bells have satisfied a 14-point "checklist" that includes provisions of the now-suspended FCC rule.
"If the stay chills investment and retards new entry into the local marketplace, it may become more difficult for the (FCC) to authorise the Bell companies to offer long-distance (service)," FCC Commissioner Susan Ness said in a speech only hours before the appeals court order.
And she noted that the Justice Department -- whose views "must be accorded 'substantial weight'" by the FCC -- already has signalled it will be reluctant to support Baby Bell entry as long as as the key parts of the FCC's proposed rules are on ice.
David Turetsky, deputy assistant attorney general in the department's antitrust division, said last month a stay would "seriously impair" the Bell entry process spelled out in the telecommunications law.
Any delays could delay the benefits of competition that Congress and President Clinton promised when enacting the law.
"The sooner there is competition in the local market, the consumer will benefit. And that's for sure when the Bells are allowed to go into long distance," said Geller.
"That will result in marketing and price wars. And the consumer again will greatly benefit."
But Baby Bell stocks rallied after the ruling because state regulators were likely to call for lower discounts when the companies lease their phone lines to new competitors, analysts said.
GTE, the nation's largest local phone company -- which has spearheaded the legal challenge to the FCC rules -- jumped $3.625 to $42.25 on the New York Stock Exchange.
BellSouth added $2.50 to $38.875, Bell Atlantic gained $2.125 to $60.875, NYNEX rose $1.625 to $44.50, Ameritech was up $1.75 to $56.125 and Pacific Telesis rose $1.28 to $34.66, all on the NYSE.
The appeals court suspended the FCC rule until the judges consider a challenge to the measure early next year by GTE Corp., the Bells, other local carriers and state regulators.
They argue the FCC overstepped its power by requiring the Bells and local carriers to lease their phone lines to new competitors at steep discounts of up to 25 percent.
The court's action, for now, puts back in the hands of state regulators the responsibility to set such prices.
But local phone company officials discount the chance that competition will be delayed.
"The Telecommunications Act of 1996 passed by Congress in February is the law of the land and sets forth a timetable for the introduction of competition," said GTE Senior Vice President William Barr. He said that timetable is "unaffected" by the court's action and will proceed.
