The Federal Communications Commission is expected to curb its power to approve or reject long-distance rates by ending a Depression-era rule requiring telephone carriers to notify the FCC before rate changes.
The new rules, set to be adopted on Tuesday, are meant to pump more competition into the $70 billion long-distance market and trim government red tape for AT&amp;T Corp, MCI Communications Corp, Sprint Corp and other long-distance carriers, said FCC officials.  
The 1934 rule that is headed for the scrap heap has forced long-distance companies to notify the FCC in advance of plans to change rates or offer new services through "tariff" filings with the agency.
It was intended originally to let regulators review the changes while giving the public an advance look, although the language contained in the filings is arcane and read by few.
Regulators say the new approach will let companies respond more quickly to competitors' price changes -- without the need to file burdensome paperwork with the FCC.  
They also say it will reduce the opportunity for companies to collude tacitly on long-distance rates.
And carriers will have to notify residential customers directly of a rate change. Currently, they unveil any rate increases through the complex tariff filings.
The new approach represents the first major step the FCC has taken under a provision of the new telecommunications law allowing it to shed outdated rules if the public interest is not harmed.
Currently, tariff filings take effect one day after their submission to the FCC. But it has not always been that way.  
When it was considered a "dominant" long-distance carrier, AT&amp;T complained that the filings offered competitors an early look at its plans, allowing the others to mimic the move and implement it beforehand.
The top long-distance company had to wait up to 60 days after a tariff filing for a new promotional plan before it could act on the plan. A year ago, the FCC ended AT&amp;T's dominant carrier status. That also ended the long delays.  
The FCC tried to eliminate long-distance tariff filings for "non-dominant" carriers such as MCI and Sprint about a dozen years ago. But a court said the agency lacked the power to do so. The FCC then asked Congress to change the law.
Industry officials have sought -- but apparently without success -- to retain the option of filing tariffs for certain residential telephone plans, saying that would make it easier to let consumers know what their phone rates are.
"We think there ought to be something in place for the mass marketplace," said an AT&amp;T spokesman.  
He added that tariff filings allow residential customers to know the terms and conditions of their service. And he said they save the company the expense of having to communicate those terms and conditions to individual customers.
But critics complain that such a practice would make it tougher for consumers to know when a rate rise was coming, because it would be buried in the jargon of the tariff filing.
Officials do favor ending tariff filings for big business customers, paperwork that can run hundreds of pages. Ending the practice, they say, would give carriers added flexibility to negotiate the best deals with big customers.
Business users agree.
"It allows for individual customers to negotiate the best terms and conditions for them, while preserving the normal customer-supplier confidentiality we see in other contracts," said Ray Cline, director of information systems for the American Petroluem Institute, an oil industry trade group.
