The Federal Communications Commission reined in its regulation of long-distance telephone rates Tuesday by scrapping a Depression-era rule requiring phone carriers to tell the agency beforehand of rate changes.
FCC officials said the move was designed to inject more competition into the $70 billion long-distance market and cut thousands of pages of government red tape for long-distance companies such as AT&amp;T Corp. and MCI Communications Corp.
But industry officials and consumer advocates argued the new approach will lead to consumer confusion and make it tougher for consumers to get the best possible deals.
The 1934 rule the FCC ended forced long-distance carriers to tell the FCC ahead of time of plans to change rates or offer new services via "tariff" filings with the agency.
The rule was intended originally to let regulators approve or reject the changes while giving the public an advance look.
Under the new approach, companies will be required to disclose their rates and conditions to the public, such as through ad campaigns or over the Internet computer network.
FCC officials said the onset of greater competition in the long-distance market made the old rule outdated. They said that few people actually read the complex filings.
Officials said elimination of the tariff requirement removes the opportunity for long-distance carriers to tacitly collude on phone rates by getting a preview of their competitors' pricing policies.
"Competition will intensify and consumer benefits will increase as a result," said Commissioner Susan Ness.
The tariff filings currently take effect one day after their submission to the FCC. When AT&amp;T was classified a "dominant" carrier, the No. 1 long-distance company had to wait up to 60 days. The FCC ended AT&amp;T's dominant status last fall.
The new approach is the first major step the FCC has taken under a part of the new telecommunications law allowing the agency to shed outdated rules, as long as the public interest is unharmed. The new rules will take effect in nine months.
"We think it's a terrible mistake," said Mark Cooper of the Consumer Federation of America. "You need informed choices." He noted that groups such as his use the data from the tariff filings to help consumers find the best phone packages and avoid questionable deals.
Industry officials had sought -- but without success -- to retain the option of submitting tariff filings for certain residential and small-business phone plans, saying that would make it easier for customers know their phone rates.
"While AT&amp;T has always favoured less regulation, we're concerned the FCC's decision to mandate the end of tariffs will lead to more consumer confusion and possible litigation," said AT&amp;T Vice President Gerry Salemme.
