Responding to a dispute with the United States, Canada said Tuesday it plans to develop its own satellite-TV industry rather than rely on U.S. companies such as Tele-Communications Inc. to jump-start the business.
The announcement came just hours after the Federal Communications Commission rejected for a second time a bid by TCI and Colorado-based TelQuest Ventures to beam TV programmes to the United States from two satellites in Canadian-authorised orbits.
The Canadian satellites also would have beamed shows to Canadian households via pizza-sized dishes. The satellites were to have been launched by Telesat Canada, a Montreal-based satellite-communications company. It planned to lease space to both TelQuest and TCI, the No. 1 U.S. cable TV operator.
"My belief is that the time has come for us to proceed with a possible Canada-only solution and my hope is that there will be some companies that will be able to pursue that, including Telesat," Canada's minister of industry John Manley told reporters in Ottawa.
Manley plans soon to invite Canadian companies to bid for the ownership and operation of two Canadian satellites.
He told Telesat in a letter Monday he would revoke his ministry's support for the company to have access to the two satellite slots, unless the FCC gave the needed green light.
The FCC, however, rejected the TCI and TelQuest requests by noting that the Canadian government had not yet officially licensed the two satellites. The FCC had issued the same decision earlier in the summer, prompting TelQuest and TCI in August to file emergency requests for FCC approval.
Lawyers and government officials said the basis of the dispute stems from the Clinton administration's objection to allowing a Canadian satellite to beam programmes into the United States -- while U.S. companies cannot enjoy the same rights to broadcast into Canada.
In July, administration officials urged the FCC to defer action on TCI and TelQuest's bid to offer direct broadcast satellite (DBS) services from the Canadian orbital slots.
Officials from the U.S. Trade Representative's office, the Justice Department, the Commerce Department and the State Department said in a letter to FCC Chairman Reed Hundt that the requests "raise foreign, trade or competition policy issues within the jurisdiction of the Executive Branch."
They argued that Canadian curbs discriminate against U.S. programmers by requiring a minimum amount of Canadian content in TV, cable and satellite-TV broadcasts. They asserted  that Canada maintains curbs on the use of non-Canadian satellites to distribute phone and broadcast services to Canada.
In his letter to Telesat, Manley noted that U.S. officials rejected proposals to allow the TCI-TelQuest venture to proceed, while not addressing the issue of Canada's content restrictions on programming.
"The Canadians are going to insist on retaining their protectionist policies on content. And since the U.S. will not accept those policies, the Canadian are picking up their DBS marbles and going home," said Scott Harris, an attorney with Gibson, Dunn &amp; Crutcher.
