Supreme Court Justice Clarence Thomas refused Thursday to reinstate landmark federal rules aimed at prying open the nation's $100 billion local telephone market to full-fledged competition.
Thomas let stand, without comment, a U.S. appeals court order suspending key parts of the Federal Communications Commission's "interconnection" rules. The FCC, long-distance giants AT&amp;T Corp. and MCI Communications Corp., and other phone companies had asked Thomas to restore the rules, but he rejected the request.
The FCC and the long-distance companies immediately submitted a new request for the high court to lift the lower court's "stay." The matter is expected to be taken up by the entire Supreme Court for consideration. In the meantime, deregulation of the nation's local phone monopolies remains in legal limbo.
The 8th U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals, based in St. Louis, issued its stay on Oct. 15 while it considers a challenge to the rules, which spell out how long-distance carriers, cable-TV operators and others can link up to the local phone market under the new telecommunications law. Oral arguments are set for January.
GTE Corp., the Baby Bell phone companies, other local carriers and state regulators want to overturn the rules, saying the FCC overstepped its authority and usurped state powers to issue policies on pricing and other matters. Local companies and state regulators had requested the stay.
"We're gratified that the court declined to lift the stay. We are anticipating that the appeals process (against the FCC rules) will go forward and we think that is the right decision," said Bell Atlantic Corp. spokesman Jay Grossman.
The FCC and the long-distance companies had told the high court the stay ran counter to the telecom law and would hurt consumers by delaying the introduction of competition in the local market.
Thomas oversees appeals from the St. Louis-based appeals court.
The FCC rules, adopted in August, are intended to serve as a guide to negotiations between local phone companies and new rivals seeking to enter the local market.
They also are intended to serve as a reference for state arbitrators overseeing stalled negotiations.
The FCC rules, among other things, require the Bells and other local carriers to lease their phone lines to new competitors at steep discounts of up to 25 percent.
With the stay in place, state regulators will hold sway in determining what pricing and other policies will apply to the interconnection agreements between the Bells and GTE and new market entrants. Regulators in several states already have begun to issue preliminary arbitration agreements.
Scott Cleland, an analyst at the Washington Research Group, said the decision to leave the stay in place throws the process of telecommunications deregulation into uncertainty.
"It decentralizes the deregulation process down to the states and injects a lot of potential uncertainty over time," he said.
