The nation's top communications regulator Friday appealed to nearly 1,200 television stations nationwide to adhere to a voluntary ban and refrain from airing liquor advertisements.
Federal Communications Commission Chairman Reed Hundt, speaking a day after a liquor industry group said it would end its own voluntary ban on radio and TV promotions, also said he had no immediate plans to issue rules to block such ads.
"That is a long, long and hard road to travel," Hundt said of the rulemaking process.
For now, the FCC chairman plans instead to use his position as a bully pulpit to convince TV stations not owned by the four major networks to abstain from showing ads for gin, whiskey and other spirits.
Seagram Co. Ltd. in June began airing TV ads for its Royal Crown whiskey in selected local markets.
The National Association of Broadcasters (NAB), while "disappointed" with the lifting of the decades-old ban by the nation's distillers, declined to embrace Hundt's call for a voluntary ban.
Hundt applauded the decision by the big networks -- ABC, CBS, NBC and Fox -- to leave unchanged their own policies against accepting liquor ads. Together, the four own about 50 stations in major markets.
That leaves just under 1,200 commercial stations scattered across the nation not owned by the major networks.
"The government has many, many options available to it. It's not necessary for these options to be explored if the broadcasters will stand up the way the four major networks have done," Hundt told a news conference.
NAB President Edward Frits, however, noted that "over the years, individual stations have adopted their own standard regarding the acceptability of hard liquor advertising.
"We believe this process has served American consumers well, since individual stations make and will continue to make judgments every day on what is most appropriate for their local audiences," he said in a statement.
On Thursday, the Distilled Spirits Council of the United States, or Discus, said it formally ended its decades-old voluntary ban on radio and TV liquor ads. The ban had been in place since 1936 for radio and 1948 for TV.
The group said distillers should enjoy the same right to promote their products as beer and wine producers, whose ads are carried on TV. Over the past 14 years, liquor consumption in the United States has tumbled 28 percent, to 325 million gallons last year from 449 million in 1981.
The Seagram ad campaign already has unleashed criticism from lawmakers, regulators, consumer advocates and President Clinton. The FCC has opened its own probe of ads shown in Texas and New Hampshire.
Meanwhile, other liquor makers have said they are planning their own ad campaigns or are considering their options.
