Television industry moguls crafting a ratings system should spell out sexual and violence content of shows, not rely solely on a system like the motion picture code, a survey of parents issued Thursday concluded.
The nationwide survey of 679 parents showed 80 percent preferred a system that specified the level of violence, sex or bad language rather than the age group for which a program is intended, as the motion picture industry's 28-year-old system does for movies.
The survey was a joint effort of the National Parent Teacher Association, the Institute for Mental Health Initiatives and University of Wisconsin researchers. It came as TV executives raced to complete a ratings system in the next month.
The executives favor an approach like the alphabetical code used by the Motion Picture Association of America (MPAA) for movies. Individual networks would rate their shows.
But the survey sponsors -- along with Rep. Edward Markey, D-Mass. -- want a system that covers content and viewer age.
"Parents want it all. They want every shred of information available about every program," said Markey, the author of a provision in the new communications law requiring TV makers to install a "V-chip" in all new sets. The device can be used with the upcoming ratings to let parents block shows they consider too violent or racy.
Markey told a news conference it would be "very unfortunate" if the TV industry ignored the survey results and did not incorporate the kind of system used by the Home Box Office cable-TV movie channel to rate its shows. Each HBO show is given a rating based on content such as "MV" for "mild violence" or "SC" for "strong sexual content."
Markey vowed the groups sponsoring the poll would "scream to the high heavens" if the TV ratings ignored program content.
MPAA President Jack Valenti, overseeing the ratings' creation, said his group welcomed all suggestions. "We are trying to devise a TV parental guidance system which will be family friendly, easy to understand, easy to use, and most of all grounded in honorable purposes so that parents can better monitor and supervise the TV watching of their children."
