Television executives have tentatively agreed to rate shows based on their suitability for kids of different age groups, industry sources said Tuesday, disappointing advocates of a ratings system that would specify the level of sex, violence and bad language.
The new ratings system is expected to be completed by year's end and would be similar -- but not identical to -- the 28-year-old system now used by the motion-picture industry.
The Motion Picture Association of America (MPAA) code uses letters and numbers -- G, PG, PG-13, R and NC-17 -- to suggest the age groups for which a film is appropriate.
The TV industry executives, meeting privately since March, rejected a system backed by children's advocates and educators to rate shows based on content -- sex, violence and language.
An industry source said that approach -- now used by cable network HBO -- would be unworkable for the hundreds of shows on broadcast and cable TV and would fail to deliver a uniform standard across the various broadcast and cable networks.
Individual networks or syndicators would rate their shows.
"It's just too hard to have uniformity," said the source.
The HBO system, first devised in the mid-eighties, offers content-based ratings such as "MV" for "mild violence," "SC" for "strong sexual content" and "AL" for "adult language."
Industry sources stressed that the TV ratings system has not been finalised and that details need to be worked out.
Publicly, executives said no agreement has been reached.
"It would be premature to suggest that we've reached any agreement," said Decker Anstrom, president of the National Cable Television Association.
Once completed, the ratings will be used with a "V-chip" that will be installed in new TV sets to allow parents to block shows they consider too violent or racy.
News that a content-based system had been rejected brought protest from children's advocates and others.
"It's very unfortunate. We're going to end up with a system that is not going to be very helpful to parents," said Kathryn Montgomery of the Centre for Media Education.
Montgomery, who met Tuesday with the industry group overseeing the ratings system, charged that the TV executives "never seriously considered" a content-based system and that "their minds were made up from the beginning."
Representative Edward Markey, R-Mass., the backer of the 1996 V-chip legislation, said the "'V' for violence" appears to have been "hijacked." "It's time the public joined in a search for the missing 'V' so we can restore it to the V-chip," he added.
A survey issued last month by the National Parent Teacher Association,  the Institute for Mental Health Initiatives and University of Wisconsin researchers reported that 80 percent of parents polled preferred a content-based ratings system.
