The state of Alaska has asked the Federal Communications Commission to ban broadcast advertising of hard liquor, adding to the controversy over whether liquor ads should be allowed on television and radio.
Lawyers said the state's petition -- backed by former U.S. Surgeon General C. Everett Koop -- was significant.
It could be used at the least as a vehicle within the FCC to generate public debate on the issue, or as a catalyst leading to rules restricting broadcast liquor promotions.
"Whenever you have a state formally asking the FCC to step in, it legitimises the involvement of the commission for any 'doubting Thomases' that might remain," said attorney Nick Allard of Latham &amp; Watkins.
The FCC is divided over the issue. Chairman Reed Hundt favours banning the ads if TV stations refuse to abide by a voluntary ban. But two of the FCC's four commissioners have doubts over the FCC's authority to act in the matter.
FCC officials have yet to decide how to handle the Alaska request, which was submitted last month but drew little notice. They also have not yet decided how to respond to a recent bipartisan request from 26 members of Congress asking the FCC to open a formal investigation into broadcast liquor ads.
The split among commissioners has stymied action for now.
The Federal Trade Commission has opened a formal investigation into alcoholic beverage advertising on TV, both for liquor and beer. It is training its sights for now on distiller Joseph E. Seagram &amp; Sons and the Stroh Brewery Co. Seagram is a subsidiary of Montreal-based Seagram Co.
Alaska, in its petition, asserted that the FCC does have the jurisdiction to act and called for speedy action.
"Advertising of distilled spirits on television and radio will inevitably increase the use of this potent drug among the nation's young people," Alaska said in its petition, written by the state's attorney general, Bruce Botelho, and Assistant Attorney General Stephen Slotnick.
The petition cited data showing that Alaska's per-capita alcohol consumption was third-highest in the nation in 1994.
Alaska made its request after the nation's distillers last month ended their decades-old voluntary ban on broadcast ads. It had been in place since 1936 for radio and 1948 for TV.
In June, Seagram began airing TV ads for its Royal Crown whiskey in Texas.
Some dismissed Alaska's bid.
"It's fair to say the Alaska proposal and (the state's) alcohol problem have more to do with a lack of sunlight than whether Seagram advertises for its whiskey," said attorney Robert Corn-Revere of Hogan &amp; Hartson.
"An FCC ban of hard-liquor advertising would have a very hard chance of surviving judicial review," he added.
But others said a carefully crafted FCC proposal -- such as restricting the ads until after 10 p.m. or later -- could withstand judicial scrutiny. "The courts have looked favourably on regulations designed to protect children," said attorney George Vradenberg of Latham &amp; Watkins.
Lawyers said the FCC must decide what, if any, action it wants to take. Some within the FCC suggest putting the Alaska and congressional requests out for public comment to allow the agency to learn more about the issue.
"Let's take it one step at a time," said an FCC official.
