A television industry group is set to formally unveil its controversial system for rating programmes on Thursday so parents can better control the shows their children tune in.
The group of broadcast, cable-TV and Hollywood executives has been meeting privately since March to fashion a motion-picture style system to rate the thousands of hours of shows based on their suitability for kids of different ages.
Despite loud criticism from lawmakers, parents groups, consumers advocates, educators and others, the executives said they have decided against a content-based system that would spell out the level of sex, violence and strong language.
They called such an approach unworkable. And they said an age-based system -- such as TV-14 as suitable for children age 14 and older -- will be easy for parents to use, simple to understand, and convenient for newspapers to publish.
Jack Valenti, chief executive of the Motion Picture Association of America and head of the group developing the ratings, predicted to reporters that once more people begin to understand the new system, they will realise "this is a hell of a lot better than what we have now."
The ratings, to be unveiled in Washington, are expected to include six categories. Four are expected to be: TV-G for suitable for all ages; TV-PG for parental guidance suggested; TV-14 for kids 14 and older; and TV-M for mature audiences.
The other two will cover children's programs: those suitable for all kids and those for children older than seven.
The ratings will be put in use next month. TV networks and syndicators will rate their shows. News, news magazine shows such as "60 Minutes" and sports will be exempted.
But programmes such as "Hard Copy" and "Entertainment Tonight" are expected to receive ratings instead of being classified as bona fide news programmes, said one source.
President Clinton last week gave the system a conditional green light, saying that critics should allow the TV industry to test the ratings for 10 months before demanding changes.
Yet the controversy is unlikely to die soon. Kathryn Montgomery, president of the Centre for Media Education, a children's advocacy group, called the system "inadequate."
She said it "fails to provide parents the information they need to make decisions about what their children will watch."
Top officials at the Federal Communications Commission plan to reserve judgment until they study the system.
