Television and Hollywood moguls on Thursday formally unveiled their controversial system to rate TV programmes, ushering in a new era meant to enable parents to control their kids' viewing habits better.
Broadcast and cable-TV networks will begin displaying the six ratings categories at the start of shows as soon as Jan. 2. The ratings will appear briefly as a small icon in the upper left-hand corner of the TV screen.
The age-based system is similar to the 28-year-old motion-picture industry ratings and will apply to nearly all shows, including cartoons and talk shows. News and sports programmes will be exempted.
President Bill Clinton, appearing in the Oval Office with leading TV and Hollywood executives, called the new ratings a "huge step forward over what we have now, which is nothing."
While not endorsing the system, Clinton said the ratings "are going to give America's families more help in choosing appropriate television programming for their children."
Even before its unveiling, the system had drawn flak from lawmakers, parent groups, children's advocates, educators and others. They want the ratings content-based, specifying the level of sex, violence and strong language.
The ratings are: TV-G for suitable for all ages; TV-PG for parental guidance suggested; TV-14 for parents of children under 14 strongly cautioned; TV-M for mature audiences only and two categories applying to children's shows: TV-Y for all children and TV-Y7 for kids seven and older.
Executives said they expected programmes such as "Hard Copy" and "Entertainment Tonight" to receive ratings instead of being exempted as bona fide news programmes.
"Our goal was to create TV parental guidelines which would be simple to use, easy to understand and handy to find, and we have accomplished it," said Jack Valenti, president of the Motion Picture Association of America and head of the group that developed the television ratings.
The group included representatives from the broadcast and cable-TV industries and Hollywood. "We don't claim any divine inspiration," Valenti told a news conference, adding that the system was "not written in stone." Industry executives plan to review the ratings over the next few months.
"What we are presenting is our best offer," Valenti said.
Networks and producers will rate their own shows, unlike the movie industry, where an independent panel rates films. TV executives argue they have far more programmes to rate, with up to 2,000 hours a day of shows, equivalent to about 1,000 movies a day.
Critics, while welcoming the system, say it is vague, does not go far enough and will prove unhelpful to parents. Child advocacy, public health, religious and education groups plan a campaign to see that a content-based system is developed. They favour an approach in which letters such as V, S and L are used to denote the level of violence, sex and bad language.
"The system which they propose is too complicted. It's too vague. It doesn't give parents the information which they need in their homes for their kids," said Representative Edward Markey, a Democrat from Massachusetts and a vocal critic of the TV industry plan. He called on the industry to test both the aged-based and content-based systems side by side in the home.
But industry officials said a content-based plan would be unwieldly. They said their own system would be more practical for parents, and more convenient for newspapers to print.
The ratings stem from the telecommunications law enacted in February that requires new TV sets to include a "V-chip." The technology, expected to be available in a year or so, will be used in conjunction with the ratings and allow parents to screen out programmes they do not want their children to watch.
Clinton last week gave the system a conditional green light, saying critics should allow the TV industry to test the ratings for 10 months before demanding changes.
Top officials at the Federal Communications Commission will review the ratings over the next few weeks. Under the telecommunications law, the FCC must set up an advisory panel to devise a ratings system if the industry fails within a year to craft an "acceptable" plan.
Valenti vowed to fight any government-imposed system in court on First Amendment free speech grounds.
