Ameritech Corp. Thursday became the first Baby Bell phone company to seek federal approval under the new telecommunications law to offer long-distance service from its regional calling area.
The Chicago-based carrier asked the Federal Communications Commission for permission to provide long-distance service to residents in Michigan, one of five midwestern states in which the company now provides local service. Ameritech has 3.5 million customers in Michigan.
Under last year's law, Ameritech and other Bells can offer long-distance service from within their local-calling regions once regulators are convinced the Bells have opened their local network to new rivals such as AT&amp;T Corp. and others.
The Bells can then provide customers the convenience of one-stop shopping involving local and long-distance service.
"It's the single largest potential change that can occur quickly in the communications market," said analyst Scott Cleland of Schwab Washington Research Group.
"If Ameritech gets a yes, it's easy for them to gain customers." The company has 11 million residential customers in Illinois, Michigan, Wisconsin, Indiana and Ohio.
FCC Chairman Reed Hundt said Ameritech's more than 4,000-page application "opens a new chapter" in the implementation of the landmark telecom law.
But the application is sure to face tough scrutiny at the agency and from other government regulators.
Long-distance giants AT&amp;T Corp. and MCI Communications Corp. called on the FCC to reject the move, saying Ameritech has not yet opened its local phone market.
The FCC -- after consulting with the Justice Department and Michigan regulators as well as seeking public comment -- has 90 days to decide whether Ameritech's entry is in the public interest.
In particular, the carrier must meet a detailed 14-point checklist showing it has opened its local network in Michigan to new competitors.
"The American people have called for choice," said Ameritech Chief Executive Richard Notebart. "Congress responded last year by passing a law that accelerates a competitive marketplace for all communications services. Ameritech is stepping forward to make this happen."
AT&amp;T, however, called Ameritech's bid "clearly premature."
"It's obvious that real local service competition does not yet exist in Ameritech's Michigan territory," said AT&amp;T spokesman Ray O'Connell.
O'Connell accused Ameritech of trying to delay competition by ignoring orders from Michigan regulators to open its local network. He pointed out that Michigan's attorney general has intervened against Ameritech in a case pending before the state's supreme court.
"By any competitive or public interest standard, Ameritech's application to begin offering in-region long-distance service should be rejected," said Jonathan Sallet, MCI's chief policy counsel.
The No. 2 long-distance carrier said that Ameritech still controls 99.6 percent of Michigan's local phone customers, and that only four companies offer local service in Michigan.
None of the big three long-distance carriers -- AT&amp;T, MCI and Sprint -- now offer such service.
In any event, Ameritech's bid is expected to put pressure on other Bells to seek similar permission soon. Nynex Corp., which serves the Northeast United States, is considered a top candidate to seek approval in the near future.
