A U.S. appeals court in St. Louis is set to hear arguments Friday on whether to reactivate or throw out a major Federal Communications Commission order opening the $100 billion local phone market to competition.
Lawyers and analysts predict the FCC and its long-distance phone company allies will lose the latest battle to GTE Corp., the Baby Bells, other local carriers and state regulators who want to overturn the order. It spells out how new entrants to the local phone business can link to Bell local networks.
The appeals court suspended the FCC order in October, pending Friday's case. "The FCC faces a tough uphill battle," said attorney Alfred Mamlet of Steptoe &amp; Johnson. "This case is headed for the Supreme Court."
As a result, the FCC's "interconnection" order is likely to hang in legal limbo for at least a year while it is fought over in court -- a prospect analysts expect will cloud the phone industry's outlook and weigh on phone company stocks.
"It adds to the uncertainty out there," said analyst Scott Cleland of Schwab Washington Research Group.
The order was meant to implement the 1996 communications law, which allowed local and long-distance carriers, cable-TV operators and others into each other's business.
The appeals court, in suspending the order, sided with the local carriers and state regulators who charged that the FCC overstepped its power by issuing national rules on pricing and other matters instead of leaving those issues to the states.
The court wrote that opponents "have a better than even chance of convincing the court the the FCC's pricing rules conflict with the plain meaning" of the 1996 law.
With the order expected to remain on ice for a while, lawyers and analysts said state regulators and federal judges will have the chief job of prying open local phone monopolies to long-distance companies such as AT&amp;T Corp. and others.
FCC Chairman Reed Hundt warned that piecemeal deregulation -- with judges around the nation ultimately deciding terms for opening local phone markets -- would have a "very negative impact" on industry efforts to raise capital.
FCC officials have said the case will not be resolved before the high court until spring 1998, at the earliest.
The order requires the Bells and other local carriers to lease their phone lines to new competitors at discounts of up to 25 percent.
The FCC also ordered local carriers to "unbundle" their local networks into pieces -- such as call-switching devices and operator and directory assistance -- so new competitors can lease components to complete their own networks.
The "unbundled elements" were to be priced at competitive levels based on the cost of new and more-efficient facilities.
In the meantime, state regulators have been issuing decisions on terms for opening the local markets. FCC Chairman Hundt said that despite the suspension of his agency's order, 29 of 31 states so far have adopted the FCC pricing policies.
But even those decisions are being challenged. GTE Corp. in particular, as well as AT&amp;T, have appealed some of those rulings to federal courts around the country.
Henry Geller, a former FCC general counsel, blamed the legal morass on Congress, saying lawmakers "botched" the job of writing the 1996 law. "The whole idea was that the courts weren't going to be determining this," he said.
