The brouhaha over Newt Gingrich's intercepted telephone call has shed light on how easy it is to eavesdrop on cellular calls and how seldom cases are prosecuted -- even though the law is violated daily.
"It's had the chilling effect of reminding us all that anyone at any time could be listening to our most private conversations," Rep. Billy Tauzin, a Louisiana Republican, said of the widely publicized incident involving the House speaker.
Tauzin, who chairs the House of Representatives telecommunications subcommittee, has called for hearings into cellular privacy.
Federal law makes it a crime to intentionally intercept or disclose the contents of a telephone call, regardeless of whether it is over a hard-wired, cellular or cordless phone.
But experts can cite only a handful of cell-phone cases that have drawn publicity. Politicians have been involved.
Justice Department spokesman John Russell said that in the case of cellular calls, the law is "seldom used" and the department "seldom" gets complaints.
For one, people rarely know when they have been overheard on their cell phone. And the complicated law is little known.
In once case, Sen. Charles Robb, a Virginia Democrat, got into hot water in 1991 over an illegal tape recording of a cellular call made by a political rival, Virginia Gov. Douglas Wilder. Robb was spared indictment. Four associates pleaded guilty in the case.
Another case in 1990 centered on an intercepted cell-phone conversation involving then-Rep. Bill Sarpalius, a Democrat from Texas.
Tapes and transcripts of the call -- in which Sarpalius spoke with a young woman about a date and a possible job -- were made available to local media. Two unrelated men were later fined about $250 each in connection with the incident.
Why the dearth of legal action?
"Violations of this law are very, very hard to detect. That is why there are so few cases," said Clifford Fishman, a law professor at Catholic University of America in Washington.
"The person whose privacy is invaded usually never hears about it and so does not alert authorities."
What's more, the eavesdroppers usually are not familiar with the people they are monitoring. Penalties generally are light, except in cases involving repeat offenses or use of the information to commit another crime.
The only times a case does seem to arise is when the perpetrator tries to capitalize on the conversation.
"It doesn't come to light unless somebody makes political or commercial use of the information," said Paul Rothstein, a law professor at Georgetown University Law Center in Washington.
Yet experts agree the law is broken frequently -- possibly hundreds or thousands of times a day -- given the availability and use of scanners that can tune in wireless calls. It's estimated that anywhere from 10 million to 20 million scanners are in use nationwide, many able to eavesdrop on cellular calls.
"While the cellular industry may give their customers the illusion of privacy by assuring customers that it is illegal to listen, and that cellular-capable scanners are no longer manufactured or imported into the United States, millions of Americans do listen in," according to Bob Grove, publisher of Monitoring Times Magazine.
Last week, the FBI opened an investigation into the taping and leaking of a telephone conference call between Gingrich and his top lieutenants. The probe came after a Florida couple said they  delivered a tape of the cellular phone conversation to the senior Democrat on the House Ethics Committee.
A transcript of the tape was published in two newspapers two days later, prompting Republican calls for an FBI criminal probe into the source of the leak.
"You're not going to see the law enforced unless it involves a person of rank, such as a politician," said Linus Layne Baker, a Kansas City, Mo. attorney who was fined in the Texas case. "You won't see the media prosecuted either."
One option under study in wake of the Gingrich incident is whether to beef up a law that outlaws the sale, manufacture or imporation of scanners capable of picking up cellular calls.
