The Federal Communications Commission's new rules opening the local telephone market to competition are likely to survive a slew of legal challenges leveled by state regulators and local phone companies, lawyers predicted Wednesday.
They said it is unlikely a federal court would overturn the core of the "interconnection" rules.  They said such a move would happen only if the FCC acted arbitrarily, or grossly overstepped its legal boundaries by making the rules inconsistent with the new telecommunications law.  
But lawyers do not believe the FCC has overstepped the law. "Unless the commission has really overstepped the bounds, no court is going to be eager to overturn this carefully constructed apple cart," said attorney Jeffrey Olson with Paul, Weiss, Rifkind, Wharton &amp; Garrison.
Scott Harris, a former top FCC official who is now an attorney with Gibson, Dunn &amp; Crutcher, echoed that view.
"The commission will eventually win in court," he said.
State regulators already have filed suit to block the new rules, which the FCC issued last month.  
On Wednesday, the New York Public Service Commission said it asked the U.S. Court of Appeals in New York to annul the rules, which implement the 1996 Telecommunications Act.
The regulator said the FCC rules are an intrusion on the state's authority to set local telecommunications policy.
Last week, the National Association of Regulatory Utility Commissioners -- which represents state regulators -- said it would ask the courts to offer a speedy review of the rules.
The regulations are designed to break open local phone monopolies and give long-distance companies, cable television firms and others a crack at offering local phone service.  
Meanwhile, GTE Corp and Southern New England Telecommunications Corp said they would ask a federal appeals court in Washington to block the rules.
BellSouth Corp said it would ask a federal appeals court to overturn the rules, charging that the FCC had "gone far beyond the intent of Congress."
U S West Communications Group is exploring legal options, including a legal challenge or having the court set aside certain components of the rules through a "stay."  
In addition, the United States Telephone Association, a trade group representing the Baby Bells and local phone companies, said it is exploring its legal options and plans to be involved in the appeals process.
But lawyers think the rules will withstand such moves.
"The (FCC) did such a good job here it is going to be sustained on appeal," said Harris of Gibson, Dunn &amp; Crutcher.
Lawyers said that while a court could rule against the FCC on smaller aspects of the interconnection rules, the heart of the rules should remain unscathed.  
Still, lawyers hedged their bets and said it was possible that the FCC could lose and that the legal challengers could pull a rabbit out of the hat and have the rules overturned.
"You may get lucky.  You may win the lottery," said Olson of Paul, Weiss, explaining the tactics behind the challenges.
"If I were a betting man, the odds favor the commission over the petitioners," said former FCC General Counsel Henry Geller.  "But I wouldn't put a lot of money on it."
