President Clinton and Congress are again set to look to airwave sales to cut the deficit, although analysts note the radio spectrum is not a bottomless money pit and prices should fall as more space is sold.
"They need to be careful that they're not killing the golden goose," said Joe Boyer of Hatfield Associates Inc., a Boulder, Colo. telecommunications consulting firm.
"The issue may be whether the federal government creates a glut of spectrum available," said Boyer, noting that such an oversupply would force down prices -- and thus the amount of money the government could fetch through auctions.
Auctions for the rights to use the airwaves have been a cash bonanza for Uncle Sam. Since the summer of 1994, the Federal Communications Commission has raised about $23 billion for the government through 12 spectrum auctions.
The FCC has sold licenses for a new generation of cellular phones known as "personal communications services," or PCS, satellite TV, "wireless" cable TV and other services.
"It's been the most valuable asset the government has had to sell in decades," said budget analyst Stan Collender of Burson-Marsteller.
The president is set to unveil his fiscal 1998 budget on Feb. 6 for the year that begins next Oct. 1. White House officials have told lawmakers to expect spectrum auctions to be a part of the plan, though details are unclear.
For fiscal 1997, Clinton proposed, among other things, to auction in 2002 the "analog" spectrum TV broadcasters would return to the government in the transition to high-definition digital TV. The sale was projected to raise $17 billion.
But more sales could well mean lower prices.
The Congressional Budget Office last year predicted the price of valuable spectrum under 3 GHz -- airwaves that can be used for PCS, digital TV, paging, and other services -- will fall "as more spectrum is brought to market."
Already, there are signs of softer prices. A PCS auction that ended last month netted $2.5 billion, down 75 percent from a similar auction last May that raised $10.2 billion.
The average license price tumbled more than 90 percent.
Analysts were quick to note that smaller airwave parcels were auctioned at the latest sale and that financing terms extended by the government were not as attractive.
But they also said the drop reflected the dearth of new money available after the sky-high prices paid at last year's PCS sale and the flood of new entrants to the market.
"If everybody builds out the spectrum that has been acquired in the PCS auctions, there would be more than enough capacity for every man, woman, and child and every household pet in the United States," said Boyer.
While more sales could mean lower proceeds, many analysts argue that more auctions also would usher in more competitors to the market -- and thus drive down prices of cellular phone service, pagers, Internet access and other services.
"The first thing you have to think about is 'What's good for getting communications services to the public?'" said Charles Jackson, of Strategic Policy Research, a consulting firm in Bethesda, Md. "Only after you've solved that problem do you worry about auction revenues."
Experts said plenty of spectrum is available to auction. "There's a lot more spectrum out there," said James Gatusso of Citizens for a Sound Economy, a free-market advocacy group.
"There's much, much more that can be done," he said.
