The U.S. communications revolution is off to a slow start, unleashing more hype than competition among local and long-distance carriers, cable-TV firms, utilities and others.
But experts say that, just one year after passage of the huge telecommunication reform bill, it is too early to judge it a failure. Most predict the current "phoney war" ultimately will be followed by heated competition, new services and lower prices in communications.
But it will take time, possibly five years or more.
"This is on track to be the kind of event that will change our economy and our society," said industry analyst Jeffrey Kagan of Kagan Telecom Associates in Atlanta.
"Expecting there to be significant change in the first year is bordering on ridiculous," Kagan said.
Scott Cleland of Schwab Washington Research Group agreed: "The timetable people had for this bill was overly ambitious."
The Telecommunications Act of 1996, enacted on February 8, ripped down 62-year-old legal barriers and encouraged local and long-distance carriers, cable-TV operators, electric utilities and others to invade each other's backyards.
Lawmakers, analysts and industry officials held out the prospect of one-stop shopping, enabling technology junkies to dial local and long-distance calls, hook up to the Internet, and speak over wireless phones via the same company.
But that has yet to materialise in a big way and prices are up. Experts attribute the slow start to several factors.
The law's timetable stretches out as long as 15 months. Consequently, key rules designed to help break open the $100 billion local phone market to new competitors have yet to be finalised by the Federal Communications Commission.
A U.S. appeals court in St. Louis has suspended the market-opening rules already set by the FCC. And carriers are going to court over key decisions by state regulators.
Moreover, industry officials say it takes time to get new technology, packaging and billing procedures in place.
"It takes time to design a system, get the components ordered and assembled, hire the people and train them," said NYNEX Corp Executive Vice President Tom Tauke.
The law's critics have plenty to gripe about.
Prices for long-distance service were expected to fall, and the phone, cable-TV, utility, broadcast and computer industries were expected to scramble to bring entertainment, news, information and calling services to homes and offices.
PROMISED COMPETITION IS BARELY SEEN, MANY PRICES RISE
But a year later, the local phone market remains a monopoly run by the Baby Bells and other local carriers. So far, they have been successful in court fighting FCC rules.
The $78 billion long-distance market remains dominated by AT&amp;T Corp., MCI Communications Corp. and Sprint Corp.. However, Ameritech Corp. has asked for FCC approval to offer long-distance service from its local-calling region.
Big cable-TV operators such as Time Warner Inc. and Tele-Communications Inc. have watered down plans to offer phone service and are instead defending their own turf. Phone companies have trimmed plans for cable-TV.
Prices for communications services, instead of falling, are rising. Cable-TV rates jumped 7.8 percent last year, more than double the 3.3 percent rise in consumer prices. Residential interstate long-distance rates rose 3.7 percent, while intrastate long-distance rates jumped 6.1 percent.
"My reasons for voting against the bill were valid. And I'm very sorry, because it's the American citizen who is paying more for these services rather than less," Sen. John McCain, chairman of the commerce committee, told Reuters.
The Arizona Republican is planning hearings on the telecom industry but will not push any major bills this year.
A string of mergers among the seven Bells, meanwhile, has narrowed the number of potential competitors in the phone business, with Bell Atlantic Corp. acquiring NYNEX and SBC Communications Inc. buying Pacific Telesis Group.
Outside the Bells, No. 4 long-distance carrier WorldCom Inc. is buying MFS Communications Co., a supplier of local phone to businesses. And British Telecommunications Plc plans to buy the No. 2 U.S. long-distance carrier, MCI.
"The forces of evil are running well ahead of the forces of good," says the Consumer Federation of America's Mark Cooper. "Price increases and market concentration are keeping apace .... Nothing good happened this year for competition."
BILL'S SUPPORTERS COUNSEL PATIENCE
But the bill's supporters counsel patience.
"I don't think you can stop it now. The competition genie is out of the bag," Representative Billy Tauzin, a Louisiana Republican who chairs the telecommunications subcommittee, said.
Industry officials admit they underestimated the task -- both the cost and complexity of new technologies to allow competition to proceed.
Companies will have to overcome such hurdles when bundling together services -- such as local, long-distance and wireless phone services -- into one package for customers.
And there are other complexities: long-distance carriers will have to lease space on their lines to local carriers wanting to offer long-distance service; alternatively, local carriers will have to lease their networks to long-distance carriers seeking to break into the local phone business.
"Getting systems in place on every side is a tough thing to do," said Randy New, a BellSouth Corp. vice-president.
Analaysts and industry officials also say that the FCC must still resolve key issues before local competition can truly come to the local phone market -- namely, how to finance and ensure affordable phone service for all Americans and how to cut the $20 billion in "access charges" long-distance carriers pay local phone companies to link to their networks.
FCC Chairman Hundt says the courts, regulators and lawmakers must resist industry efforts to stifle competition.
"For the next two years, everybody is going to beat us up to maintain the status quo," he told Reuters. "We should be very optimistic as long as we stay the course."
