U.S. Vice President Al Gore on Wednesday defended last year's telecommunications law against critics who charge it is a failure, saying that the Clinton administration has no plans to try and reopen the act.
"This is the first year of a process of change that will take quite some time," Gore told a group of reporters. He also noted that several key provisions of the sweeping law have yet to be implemented.  
The law, enacted last February 8, ripped down 62-year-old legal barriers and encouraged local and long-distance carriers, cable-TV operators, electric utilities and others to invade each other's backyards.
Gore said the difficult negotiations over the bill during the prior four years have led most participants to realize just how delicate and complex the legislation is.
"Most reasonable people believe it will be a little time before much of it is opened up," Gore said, echoing the view of several lawmakers on Capitol Hill.  
But critics -- including influential Arizona Republican Senator John McCain and consumer groups -- complain that despite the bill's enactment, the $100 billion local phone market remains a monopoly run by the Baby Bells and other local carriers.
They also note that the $78 billion long-distance market remains dominated by AT&amp;T Corp, MCI Communications Corp and Sprint Corp.
Prices for communications services, instead of falling, are rising. Cable-TV rates jumped 7.8 percent last year, more than double the 3.3 percent rise in consumer prices.  
Residential interstate long-distance rates rose 3.7 percent, while intrastate long-distance rates jumped 6.1 percent.
Gore noted, however, that the increases in cable-TV rates are not a result of the new law and that they come within the guidelines established by a major 1992 cable-TV law.
Meanwhile, big cable-TV operators such as Time Warner Inc and Tele-Communications Inc have watered down plans to offer phone and other services and are instead defending their own turf.  
Gore said he was "surprised" by those decisions, but added that it has not been universal among all cable companies.
"I rather suspect the pioneers who make these investments will be handsomely rewarded by the market," Gore said. That, in turn, should spur other cable companies to take the plunge and diversify their offerings.
Meanwhile, Gore aide Greg Simon told reporters that the administration is sticking by its proposal for an expedited auction of analog spectrum that will be returned by television broadcasters during the transition to digital TV.
Under the administration plan, the government would auction the spectrum in 2002, with digital TV stations required to return their analog channel to the government no later than 2005.
