Lawmakers and law-enforcement officials voiced support Wednesday for tougher laws to bar eavesdropping on cellular phone calls, following the uproar over Newt Gingrich's intercepted call.
A House telecommunications subcommittee is training its sights on a little-enforced law banning the sale, manufacture and importation of scanners that can pick up cellular calls.
Despite the 1992 law, scanner enthusiasts have used legal loopholes to modify tens of thousands of otherwise legal scanners so they can overhear cellular traffic. An estimated 10 million legal scanners are in the hands of the public.
"Our goal is to make sure that the sale of this kind of equipment drops precipitously," declared Representative Edward Markey, a Massachusetts Democrat and author of the law.
Markey, speaking at a hearing of the subcommittee, called the modified scanners "a great danger to the presumption of privacy" enjoyed by users of cellular phones.
Markey expressed support for closing the necessary loopholes to make it tougher for scanner operators to illegally tap in on cellular calls.
The head of the subcommittee, Representative Billy Tauzin, R-La., also said "there is a problem in enforcement."
He noted the Federal Communications Commission refers potential criminal cases to other agencies "that may have less interest in enforcing the anti-intercept laws, due to other, and perhaps, more important law-enforcement priorities.
"Perhaps a solution is to rationalise the respective enforcement roles of the FCC, the Justice Department and the FBI," Tauzin added.
Last month, the FBI opened an investigation into the taping and leaking of an embarrassing conference call between House Speaker Gingrich and his top lieutenants.
The probe came after a Florida couple said they delivered a tape of the cell-phone conversation to the senior Democrat on the House Ethics Committee, which was deliberating over a politically charged case involving Gingrich.
A transcript of the tape was published in two newspapers two days later, prompting Republican calls for an FBI criminal probe into the source of the tape.
Federal law also makes it a crime to intentionally intercept or disclose the contents of a phone call, regardless of whether it is over a hard-wired, cellular or cordless phone. Criminal violation is punishable by a penalty of up to five years in jail and a $250,000 fine.
But in the case of wireless calls in particular, the law is little enforced and penalties are light because cellular traffic is so easily intercepted.
Unless there are "aggravating" circumstances, such as a repeat offence, eavesdropping on a cellular call is treated as an infraction, with no jail time and a maximum fine of $5,000.
Deputy Assistant Attorney General Robert Litt suggested to lawmakers they explore "whether it continues to make sense" to levy different penalties for eavesdropping on the different types of calls.
"From the point of view of the person having the conversation, the invasion of privacy is the same," he said.
