The Clinton administration is making a $36 billion bet in its new budget that companies will rush to pay big bucks for a chunk of the airwaves to roll out newfangled communications services to the public.
As a part of the bet, the administration is wagering it can overcome major political forces, such as TV broadcasters, opposed to aggressive plans for selling spectrum.
Experts are split on whether the wager will pay off.
To finance its fiscal 1998 budget, the White House proposed Thursday to raise $36.1 billion by selling licenses to firms wanting to sell new ways to link to the Internet or send video images through the air, among other things.
The administration also proposed to auction toll-free 888 phone numbers instead of giving them away.
The White House, however, offered few details about its grand auction plan, which covers the five years through 2002.
Many economists think the $36 billion is achievable because of the large amounts of spectrum still available and the rush by companies to develop new products incorporating the Internet and other communications services.
"There's a lot of unmet demand for frequencies that can be used to offer new services," said James Gatusso of Citizens for a Sound Economy, a free-market advocacy group.
"A lot of people are coming through the front door of the Federal Communications Commission asking for spectrum."
Among the new services that could be rolled out in the future over newly available spectrum: high-speed wireless access to the Internet or mobile video services that allow drivers to download maps or traffic pictures in their cars.
Critics charge that any aggressive bid to sell spectrum to companies that want to use it for any purpose will backfire by driving down airwave prices and hurting companies -- such as wireless phone providers -- that already hold licenses.
"What they will do is drive the price of spectrum to zero and therefore kill the goose that lays the golden egg," said Tom Wheeler, president of the Cellular Telecommunications Industry Association, an industry trade group representing cellular carriers and other wireless phone providers.
Since 1994, the FCC has raised about $23 billion through 12 spectrum auctions for wireless cable television, satellite TV, a new generation of cellular phones and other services.
The White House proposed four auctions to raise:
-- $700 million through the sale of 888 phone numbers.
-- $17.1 billion by extending and broadening the FCC's auction powers to sell spectrum not used by TV stations.
-- $3.5 billion to sell part of the airwaves now occupied by TV channels 60-69. The channels would be made available through the transition to high-definition digital TV.
-- $14.8 billion through the sale of the analogue spectrum now occupied by TV broadcasters. The frequencies also would become available in the transition to digital TV.
The administration wants to speed up the return of the analogue spectrum to the government by requiring stations to return it by 2005. The auction would be held in 2002.
But broadcasters want to postpone any auction.
"We remain opposed to upfront auctions or accelerated giveback of broadcast spectrum. We expect the government will receive full value for spectrum once the broadcast industry transition to digital is complete," said Dennis Wharton, a spokesman for the National Association of Broadcasters.
The NAB supports an FCC plan for an approximately 15-year transition to digital broadcasts.
