Ameritech Corp. won an important endorsement Wednesday from Michigan regulators in its bid to become the first Baby Bell to offer long-distance telephone service from its local calling region.
The Michigan Public Service Commission voted to advise the Federal Communications Commission that it appears Ameritech has met a 14-point checklist for opening its local phone network in the state to new competitors -- such as AT&amp;T Corp. and other companies wanting to offer local phone service.
That checklist was spelled out under last year's big communications law as a condition for local carriers to offer long-distance service from their regions.
"We're extremely disappointed with this decision. It seems to ignore the overwhelming evidence that Ameritech faces no viable local telephone competition in Michigan," said an AT&amp;T spokesman. An Ameritech spokesman was not available.
The FCC will make the final determination on whether Ameritech has indeed met the technical checklist for entry into the $78 billion long-distance market.
But a negative review from Michigan would have dimmed the Chicago-based carrier's prospects considerably. The Justice Department must issue a recommendation to the FCC by Feb. 21.
Ameritech asked the FCC on Jan. 2 for permission to provide long-distance service to residents in Michigan, one of five Midwestern states in which the company provides local phone service. Ameritech has 3.5 million customers in Michigan.
Long-distance carriers such as AT&amp;T and MCI Communications Corp. have called on regulators to reject Ameritech's request, saying the company has not yet opened its local market fully to competitors.
The Michigan commission said that in a 2-1 vote among commissioners the agency authorised the filing of its comments in the Ameritech case with the FCC.
"For many years, the Michigan Public Service Commission has supported allowing expanded choice for telephone customers," said commission Chairman John Strand.
"Our comments today are designed to assist the Federal Communications Commission to follow a course that will introduce more competition in the telecommunications marketplace."
After filing its initial request with the FCC, Ameritech was forced to amend its application with an additional 1,500 pages of documents. Regulators had determined that many needed pages were missing.
Other Baby Bells are expected to ask the FCC for similar approval soon.
