The television industry's new ratings system is a bust and is rife with inconsistencies that make it tougher for parents to pick shows appropriate for kids, a conservative media watchdog group charged in a new study on Tuesday.
The Media Research Centre reviewed 150 hours of shows in the two weeks that ended Jan. 16 on six broadcast networks: ABC, CBS, Fox, NBC, UPN and WB. The study concluded the age-based system, which began airing Jan. 1, was confusing and contradictory.
TV officials said it was too soon to judge.
The study, for example, said 61 percent of shows got a middle-of-the-road TV-PG rating -- parental guidance suggested -- although about half of these shows contained obscenities while half did not.
Words such as "ass," "bastard," and "son of a bitch" were typical on PG shows, and while an obscenity for sexual intercourse was bleeped out three times, it was understandable when uttered, the study said.
It also charged there was no consistency within different episodes of a series. In an episode of CBS's "Moloney," a girl shot her uncle. The man fell over dead with no blood. That bloodless depiction drew a TV-14, for parents of kids under 14 strongly cautioned.
An episode a week later had a lesser PG rating even though it showed a bloody torture scene, the group said. In that episode a man put a razor blade in his wife's hand, then clasped the hand between his own and squeezed it violently, forcing the blade into her hand and causing the hand to bleed.
"After only a few weeks of the new system, it is apparent that those who said it would never work were right," said Brent Bozell, chairman of the Media Research Centre.
Bozell told a news conference the system "is a failure and should be junked at the earliest possible opportunity."
Others from the opposite end of the political spectrum said the study's findings backed their own view.
"You can't tell what the content of the shows are from the ratings," said Kathryn Montgomery of the Centre for Media Education, a children's advocacy group.
A number of groups representing lawmakers, parents, children's advocates, educators and others believe this system is too vague and advocate a content-based system that would specify violence, sex and strong language, using letters such as V, S and L.
The current ratings have two categories for children: TV-Y, children of all ages, and TV-Y7, children 7 and older.
Aside from TV-PG and TV-14, the other two categories are: TV-G, suitable for all ages; and TV-M, for mature audiences only.
TV industry officials stressed that their system was still in its infancy and that it was too early to draw conclusions.
"The television industry's parental guidelines system is barely 42 days old. Before its critics attempt to kill it in the cradle, it should be given a fair chance to establish itself," said Martin Franks, CBS Inc. senior vice president.
Congress was expected to hold hearings later this month on the system's effectiveness.
